Chapter
1 SCOPE OF ANESTHESIA
PRACTICE
Ronald D. Miller and Manuel C. Pardo, Jr.
DEFINITION OF ANESTHESIOLOGY AS A
SPECIALTY
EVOLUTION OF ANESTHESIA AS A MULTI-
DISCIPLINARY MEDICAL SPECIALTY
Pain Management
Critical Care Medicine
Pediatric Anesthesia
Cardiac Anesthesia
Obstetric Anesthesia
Other Surgical Areas of Anesthesia
PERIOPERATIVE PATIENT CARE
Preoperative Evaluation
Operating Room Theaters
Postanesthesia Care Unit
TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION IN
ANESTHESIOLOGY
Postgraduate (Residency) Training in
Anesthesiology
American Board of Anesthesiology
Credentialing and Privileging
OTHER ANESTHETIC PROVIDERS
Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetists
Anesthesiologist Assistants
QUALITY OF CARE AND SAFETY IN
ANESTHESIA
Continuous Quality Improvement
ORGANIZATIONS WITH EMPHASIS ON
ANESTHESIA QUALITY AND SAFETY
Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation
Anesthesia Quality Institute
American Society of Anesthesiology Closed
Claims Project and Its Registries
Foundation for Anesthesia Education and
Research
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY
Adverse Events
RISKS OF ANESTHESIA
HAZARDS OF WORKING IN THE OPERAT-
ING ROOM
SUMMARY AND FUTURE OUTLOOK
QUESTIONS OF THE DAY
The specialty of anesthesiology has evolved dramatically
since the first public demonstration of ether use in the
19th century. Originally, the emphasis was completely
on providing surgical anesthesia. As surgical procedures
became more diverse and complex, other associated
skills were developed. For example, airway management,
including endotracheal intubation, was required to pro-
vide controlled ventilation to patients who had respiratory
depression and paralysis from neuromuscular blocking
drugs. These practices required the development of a
“recovery room,” which was later termed a postoperative
or postanesthesia care unit (PACU) (Chapter 39). The skills
that anesthesiologists used in the recovery room evolved
and progressed into intensive care units (ICUs) and the
specialty of critical care medicine (Chapter 41). The devel-
opment of regional anesthesia created opportunities for
treatment of some chronic pain syndromes (Chapters 40
and 44). Anesthesiology also evolved into a recognized
medical specialty (as affirmed by the American Medical
Association and the American Board of Medical Special-
ties), providing continuous improvement in patient care
based on the introduction of new drugs and techniques
made possible in large part by research in the basic and
clinical sciences.
DEFINITION OF ANESTHESIOLOGY
AS A SPECIALTY
A more formal definition of the specialty of anesthesi-
ology is provided by The American Board of Anesthe-
siology (ABA).1 The ABA defines anesthesiology as a
3
Section I INTRODUCTION
discipline within the practice of medicine dealing with
but not limited to:
1. Assessment of, consultation for, and preparation of patients for
anesthesia.
2. Relief and prevention of pain during and following surgical,
obstetric, therapeutic, and diagnostic procedures.
3. Monitoring and maintenance of normal physiology during
the perioperative period.
4. Management of critically ill patients including those receiv-
ing their care in an intensive care unit.
5. Diagnosis and treatment of acute, chronic, and cancer-related
pain.
6. Management of hospice and palliative care.
7. Clinical management and teaching of cardiac, pulmonary,
and neurologic resuscitation.
8. Evaluation of respiratory function and application of respira-
tory therapy.
9. Conduct of clinical, translational, and basic science research.
10. Supervision, instruction, and evaluation of performance of
both medical and allied health personnel involved in periopera-
tive or periprocedural care, hospice and palliative care, critical
care, and pain management.
11. Administrative involvement in health care facilities and orga-
nizations, and medical schools as appropriate to the ABA’s
mission.
As with other medical specialties, anesthesiology is
represented by professional societies (American Society
of Anesthesiologists, International Anesthesia Research
Society), scientific journals (Anesthesiology, Anesthesia &
Analgesia), a residency review committee with delegated
authority from the Accreditation Council for Graduate
Medical Education (ACGME) to establish and ensure com-
pliance of anesthesia residency training programs with
published standards, and a medical specialty board, the
ABA, that establishes criteria for becoming a certified
specialist in anesthesiology. The ABA, in conjunction
with other specialty boards, has also developed criteria
for maintenance of certification, which includes a pro-
gram of continual self-assessment and lifelong learning,
along with periodic assessment of professional standing,
cognitive expertise in practice performance, and improve-
ment.1 This describes the American system. Other coun-
tries and societies have their systems to certify specialists
in anesthesiology. Some countries work in a collective
manner to educate and certify specialists in anesthesiol-
ogy (e.g., European Society of Anesthesia).␣
EVOLUTION OF ANESTHESIA AS A
MULTIDISCIPLINARY MEDICAL SPECIALTY
In the last 50 years, the medical specialty of anesthesiology
has progressively extended its influence outside the oper-
ating rooms. Initially, the most important non–operating
room patient care skills developed by anesthesia provid-
ers have been in pain management (Chapters 40 and 44)
and adult critical care medicine (Chapter 41). Beginning in
4
the 1980s, anesthesia residency training required rotation
experiences in these areas. In 1985, the ABA began issu-
ing subspecialty certificates in critical care medicine to
candidates who had completed at least a year of specialty
training, thus becoming the first recognized subspecialty
of anesthesiology. Pain medicine became the second sub-
specialty to be formally recognized when the ABA began
issuing certificates in 1991. By this time, residency pro-
grams required rotations in multiple specialty areas, and
fellowship programs in many areas were being developed.
This reflected the progressive complexity of health care as
well as extensive specialization in all fields of medicine.
Pain Management
Pain management is required in the perioperative setting
(Chapter 40) as well as for chronic pain conditions (Chap-
ter 44). The management of perioperative pain has become
more complex as the relationship between postoperative pain
control and functional outcomes (e.g., mobility after joint
replacement surgery) has become more tightly linked. In
addition, the increasing use of neuraxial and regional anes-
thesia techniques (Chapters 17 and 18) for postoperative pain
management has led to increasingly specialized acute pain
management services usually managed by anesthesiology.
An outpatient-based pain management center typi-
cally takes care of patients with chronic pain on an out-
patient basis with occasional consultations in the hospital
itself (e.g., for patients with chronic pain who require sur-
gery that leads to acute and chronic pain). Many special-
ties are involved in chronic pain management, including
neurology, neurosurgery, medicine, psychiatry, physical
medicine, and physical therapy.␣
Critical Care Medicine
Critical care medicine has significantly increased in com-
plexity over the 30 years it has been recognized as a
distinct subspecialty of anesthesiology (see Chapter 41).
Increasingly, data from large randomized clinical trials
are used to develop patient care protocols.2 The catego-
rization of ICU patients is most often arranged by one
or more specialties (e.g., medical, surgical, neurosurgical,
cardiac). Because so many specialties can or need to be
involved, the critical care medicine specialist may have
his or her initial residency training in several different
specialties, including anesthesiology, medicine, surgery,
neurology, pulmonary medicine, nephrology, or emer-
gency medicine. In many institutions, anesthesiologists
are in local leadership roles in critical care medicine.␣
Pediatric Anesthesia
Since the 1980s, anesthesia residency training has included
rotations in pediatric anesthesia (see Chapter 34), and sepa-
rate pediatric anesthesia fellowships have been offered for
many years. However, subspecialty certification by the
ABA has only been issued since 2013. In 2009, the ABA
and the American Board of Pediatrics launched a combined
integrated training program in both pediatrics and anesthe-
siology that would take 5 years instead of the traditional 6
years. In pediatric hospitals, the role of pediatric anesthe-
siologists is very clear. However, the practice (and staff-
ing challenges) becomes more complex when pediatric and
adult surgeries are performed in the same hospital. Typical
questions include how young must a patient be when only
pediatric anesthesiologists deliver anesthesia (i.e., instead of
anesthesiologists whose practice is mostly adult patients)?
How should anesthesia be covered when there are no pedi-
atric anesthesiologists? In a few hospitals, pediatric anes-
thesiologists also manage patients in the pediatric ICUs.␣
Cardiac Anesthesia
Cardiac anesthesia rotations have been required in resi-
dency for many years, and elective cardiac anesthe-
sia fellowships have been available for at least as long
(see Chapters 25 and 26). In 2006, the ACGME began
to accredit adult cardiothoracic anesthesia fellowships,
which led to increasing structure and standardization of
the fellowships, including the requirement for echocar-
diography training. Anesthesiologists can obtain certifi-
cation from the National Board of Echocardiography for
perioperative transesophageal echocardiography as well
as adult echocardiography. This certification is commonly
achieved by cardiac anesthesiologists.␣
Obstetric Anesthesia
Because of the unique physiology and patient care issues,
and the painful nature of childbirth, obstetric anesthesia
experiences have always been an essential component of
anesthesia training programs (see Chapter 33). Similarly,
anesthesia fellowship training in obstetric anesthesia has
been offered for decades. In 2012, the ACGME began to
accredit obstetric anesthesiology fellowships. Similar to
the evolution of other ACGME anesthesia fellowships
(i.e., critical care, pain medicine, pediatric anesthesia, and
adult cardiothoracic anesthesia), this has resulted in stan-
dardized and structured training to develop future leaders
in obstetric anesthesia. Currently, the ABA does not offer
subspecialty certification in this area.␣
Other Surgical Areas of Anesthesia
Anesthesia for the remaining surgical specialties is not
associated with another certification process, although
non-ACGME fellowship training may be available. These
subspecialties include cardiothoracic (Chapter 27), colon
and rectal (Chapters 28 and 29), general surgery, neuro-
logical (Chapter 30), ophthalmic (Chapter 31), oral and
maxillofacial, urology, vascular, as well as hospice and
Chapter 1 Scope of Anesthesia Practice
palliative (Chapter 35). Anesthesia for the remaining sur-
gical subspecialties is frequently delivered by anesthesiol-
ogists without additional special training other than that
provided by a standard anesthesiology residency. Often,
institutional patient volume dictates whether specialized
anesthesia teams can deliver anesthesia. For example,
institutions with large outpatient or neurosurgical surgery
may have separate specialized teams.␣
PERIOPERATIVE PATIENT CARE
Preoperative Evaluation
Perioperative care includes preoperative evaluation, prepa-
ration in the immediate preoperative period, intraoperative
care, PACU, acute postoperative pain management (Chapter
40), and possibly ICU care. Beginning in the late 1990s to
early 2000s, most surgical patients were required to arrive
the morning of surgery rather than the night before. This
change frequently dictated that the anesthesia preoperative
evaluation be performed during the morning of surgery.
However, with complex patient medical risks and surgi-
cal procedures, many institutions created a preoperative
clinic that allowed patients to be evaluated one or more
days before the day of surgery. These clinics have become
quite sophisticated (see Chapter 13) and are often managed
by anesthesiologists. Patients may be evaluated directly by
anesthesiologists, or the anesthesiologist may oversee care
provided by nurses or nurse practitioners. Periodically, a
patient will need additional evaluation by the primary care
physician or other specialists for specific patient care issues.␣
Operating Room Theaters
Operating room theaters are increasingly becoming man-
agement challenges (see Chapter 46). Matching operating
room available time with predicted surgical complexity
and length is an intellectual challenge in its own right.1-4
“Throughput” is the term used to describe the efficiency of
each patient’s experience. For decades, surgical teams have
been allowed to operate in two to three operating rooms
at the same time. For the first time in decades, the risks of
concurrent surgeries are being questioned.5 Sometimes the
throughput is delayed not because of the operating room
availability but because of insufficient beds in the PACU.
There are numerous steps in the perioperative pathway
(e.g., preoperative evaluation, the accuracy of predicting
length and complexity of surgical care, and patient flow
in and out of PACUs) that can delay a patient’s progress as
scheduled. For example, patients may need to wait in the
operating room when surgery is complete awaiting a bed
in the PACU. Institutions are increasingly appointing peri-
operative or operating room directors who either manage
the operating rooms or coordinate the entire periopera-
tive process starting from the preoperative clinic until exit
5 5
I
Section I INTRODUCTION
from the PACU. These positions can be administratively
challenging and require considerable skill and clinical
savvy. Such jobs are frequently held by an anesthesiolo-
gist, although sometimes the director might be a surgeon,
nurse, or hospital administrator.␣
Postanesthesia Care Unit
In a tertiary care hospital, the role of the PACU is pivotal
(see Chapter 39). Not only are patients recovering from
anesthesia and surgery, they also are receiving direction
for appropriate care after their PACU time that spans from
ICU to discharge. Even now, insufficient PACU beds are
often a cause of delayed throughput in operating room
theaters.1-4 There are many scenarios that illustrate this
basic problem. If the routine hospital beds are completely
occupied, there is no place to transfer fully recovered
patients in the PACU. If those patients stay in the PACU,
there will then be no beds for patients who need recov-
ery from operating room–based surgery and anesthesia.
When this problem is anticipated, then surgery start times
are delayed. In the future, as anesthesiologists take care
of patients with more complex medical risks, more PACU
beds will be required in hospitals. In addition to the qual-
ity of care, patient logistical management is key to the
quality and efficiency of care in the perioperative period.␣
TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION IN
ANESTHESIOLOGY
Postgraduate (Residency) Training in
Anesthesiology
Postgraduate training in anesthesiology in the United
States consists of 4 years of supervised experience in an
approved program after the degree of doctor of medicine
or doctor of osteopathy has been obtained. The first year
of postgraduate training in anesthesiology consists of
education in the fundamental clinical skills of medicine.
The second, third, and fourth postgraduate years (clinical
anesthesia years 1 to 3) are spent learning all aspects of
clinical anesthesia, including subspecialty experience in
obstetric anesthesia, pediatric anesthesia, cardiothoracic
anesthesia, neuroanesthesia, anesthesia for outpatient
surgery, recovery room care, regional anesthesia, and
pain management. In addition to these subspecialty expe-
riences, 4 months of training in critical care medicine is
required. The duration and structure of anesthesiology
education differ in countries around the world. Never-
theless, there is generalized international agreement on
what constitutes adequate training in anesthesiology and
its perioperative responsibilities.
The content of the educational experience during the
clinical anesthesia years reflects the wide-ranging scope of
anesthesiology as a medical specialty. Indeed, the anesthe-
siologist should function as the clinical pharmacologist and
6
internist or pediatrician in the operating room. Furthermore,
the scope of anesthesiology extends beyond the operating
room to include acute and chronic pain management (see
Chapters 40 and 44), critical care medicine (see Chapter
41), cardiopulmonary resuscitation (see Chapter 45), and
research. More recently, anesthesia training programs have
been given increasingly more flexibility. Programs can
offer integrated residency and fellowship training, includ-
ing options for significant research time. These more spe-
cialized training programs have the opportunity to produce
leaders in subspecialty clinical areas and research. In addi-
tion, the ABA has supported the development of combined
residency programs in anesthesia and internal medicine,
anesthesia and pediatrics, and, most recently, anesthesia
and emergency medicine. Clearly, anesthesia training pro-
grams are being encouraged to train anesthesiologists who
can meet the challenges of the future.
Approximately 131 postgraduate training programs in
anesthesiology are approved by the ACGME in the United
States. Approved programs are reviewed annually by the
Residency Review Committee (RRC) for Anesthesiology to
ensure continued compliance with the published program
requirements. The RRC for Anesthesiology consists of
members appointed by the American Medical Association,
the American Society of Anesthesiologists, and the ABA.␣
American Board of Anesthesiology
The ABA was incorporated as an affiliate of the American
Board of Surgery in 1938. After the first voluntary exam-
ination, 87 physicians were certified as diplomates of the
ABA. The ABA was recognized as an independent board
by the American Board of Medical Specialties in 1941.
To date, more than 30,000 anesthesiologists have been
certified as diplomates of the ABA based on completing
an accredited postgraduate training program, passing a
written and oral examination, and meeting licensure and
credentialing requirements. These diplomates are referred
to as “board-certified anesthesiologists,” and the certifi-
cate granted by the ABA is characterized as the primary
certificate. Starting on January 1, 2000, the ABA, like
most other specialty boards, began to issue time-limited
certificates (10-year limit). To recertify, all diplomates
must participate in a program designated Maintenance
of Certification in Anesthesiology (MOCA). In 2016, this
program was newly redesigned as MOCA 2.0. Diplomates
whose certificates are not time limited (any certificate
issued before January 1, 2000) may participate volun-
tarily in MOCA. The MOCA program emphasizes con-
tinuous self-improvement (cornerstone of professional
excellence) and evaluation of clinical skills and practice
performance to ensure quality, as well as public account-
ability. The components include (1) professionalism and
professional standing (unrestricted state license), (2) life-
long learning and self-assessment (formal and informal
continuing medical education [CME], including patient
safety), (3) assessment of knowledge, judgment, and skills
(completing 30 MOCA minute pilot questions per calendar
quarter), and (4) improvement in medical practice. This
final component may include a variety of self-directed
activities including simulation, quality improvement
projects, or clinical pathway development.6 Along with
several other specialties, the ABA also issues certificates
in pain medicine, critical care medicine, hospice and pal-
liative medicine, sleep medicine, and pediatric anesthe-
siology to diplomates who complete 1 year of additional
postgraduate training in the respective subspecialty, meet
licensure and credentialing requirements, and pass a writ-
ten examination. These certificates also have a 10-year
time limit. Recertification requirements are continuing
to evolve as part of the ABA transition to Maintenance
of Certification in Anesthesiology for Subspecialties Pro-
gram (MOCA-SUBS).␣
Credentialing and Privileging
After completing residency and joining the medical staff
of a hospital, the anesthesiologist must undergo the cre-
dentialing and privileging process, which allows appro-
priate institutions to collect, verify, and evaluate all
data regarding a clinician’s professional performance.
Recently, three new concepts were developed on a joint
basis by the ACGME and the American Board of Medi-
cal Specialties. General competencies (i.e., patient care,
medical/clinical knowledge, practiced-based learning and
improvement, interpersonal and communication skills,
professionalism, and systems-based practice) are used by
the medical staff to evaluate clinicians. Also, focused pro-
fessional practice evaluation can be used to provide more
thorough information about an individual clinician. The
last new concept is ongoing professional practice evalua-
tion. In essence, processes need to be developed to iden-
tify a problem as soon as possible.␣
OTHER ANESTHETIC PROVIDERS
Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetists
Certified registered nurse anesthetists (CRNAs) probably
participate in more than 50% of the anesthetics adminis-
tered in the United States, most often under the supervi-
sion of a physician. To become a CRNA, the candidate
must earn a registered nurse degree, spend 1 year as a crit-
ical care nurse, and then complete 2 to 3 years of didactic
and clinical training in the techniques of administration
of anesthetics in an approved nurse anesthesia training
program. The American Association of Nurse Anesthe-
tists is responsible for the curriculum of nurse anesthesia
training programs, as well as the establishment of criteria
for certification as a CRNA. The activities of CRNAs fre-
quently concern the intraoperative care of patients during
anesthesia while working under the supervision (medical
Chapter 1 Scope of Anesthesia Practice
direction) of an anesthesiologist. This physician-nurse
anesthetist team approach (anesthesia care team) is con-
sistent with the concept that administration of anesthe-
sia is the practice of medicine. In some situations CRNAs
administer anesthesia without the supervision or medical
direction of an anesthesiologist.␣
Anesthesiologist Assistants
Anesthesiologist assistants complete a graduate-level
program (about 27 months) and receive a master of medi-
cal science in anesthesia from an accredited training pro-
gram (currently Case Western Reserve University, Emory
University School of Medicine, Nova Southeastern Uni-
versity, South University, and University of Missouri).3,7
Anesthesiologist assistants work cooperatively under the
direction of the anesthesiologist as members of the anes-
thesia care team to implement the anesthesia care plan.␣
QUALITY OF CARE AND SAFETY IN
ANESTHESIA
Continuous Quality Improvement
Quality is a difficult concept to define in the practice of
medicine. It is generally agreed, however, that attention
to quality improves patient safety and satisfaction with
anesthetic care. Although the specialty of anesthesiol-
ogy has had such emphasis for a long time, the National
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (for-
merly the Institute of Medicine) drew attention to these
issues in medicine overall in 2000 with their report “To Err
Is Human.”4,8 New frequently used words became a rou-
tine part of our vocabulary (e.g., metrics of competency,
ongoing measurement, standardization, checklists, time-
outs, system approaches, and practice parameters).5,6,9,10
Quality improvement programs in anesthesia are often
guided by requirements of The Joint Commission (for-
merly the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Health-
care Organizations [JCAHO]). Quality of care is evaluated
by attention to (1) structure (personnel and facilities used
to provide care), (2) process (sequence and coordination
of patient care activities such as performance and docu-
mentation of a preanesthetic evaluation, and continuous
attendance to and monitoring of the patient during anes-
thesia), and (3) outcome. A quality improvement program
focuses on measuring and improving these three basic
components of care. In contrast to quality assurance pro-
grams designed to identify “outliers,” continuous quality
improvement (CQI) programs take a “systems” approach
in recognition of the fact that random errors are inher-
ently difficult to prevent. System errors, however, should
be controllable and strategies to minimize them should
be attainable. A CQI program may focus on undesirable
outcomes as a way to identify opportunities for improve-
ment in the structure and process of care.
7 7
I
Section I INTRODUCTION
Improvement in quality of care is often measured by a
decrease in the rate of adverse outcomes (see Chapter 48).
However, the relative rarity of adverse outcomes in anes-
thesia makes measurement of improvement difficult. To
complement outcome measurement, CQI programs may
focus on critical incidents and sentinel events. Critical
incidents (e.g., ventilator disconnection) are events that
cause or have the potential to cause injury if not noticed
and corrected in a timely manner. Measurement of the
occurrence rate of important critical incidents may serve
as a substitute for rare outcomes in anesthesia and lead
to improvement in patient safety. Sentinel events are
isolated events that may indicate a systematic problem
(syringe swap because of poor labeling, drug administra-
tion error related to keeping unneeded medications on the
anesthetic cart).
The key factors in the prevention of patient injury
related to anesthesia are vigilance, up-to-date knowledge,
and adequate monitoring. Obviously, it is important to
follow the standards endorsed by the American Society
of Anesthesiologists. In this regard, American anesthesi-
ology has been a leader within organized medicine in the
development and implementation of formal, published
standards of practice. These standards have significantly
influenced how anesthesia is practiced in the United
States (e.g., practice parameters).6,10
The publicity and emphasis on quality and safety
have been intense for several years, but sometimes the
standards are not implemented as rapidly and com-
pletely as desired. Recently suggestions have been made
to attach credentialing requirements and penalties for
failure to adhere to the required practices.7,11 (See also
Chapter 48.)␣
ORGANIZATIONS WITH EMPHASIS ON
ANESTHESIA QUALITY AND SAFETY
Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation
The Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation (APSF) was
established under the administration of Ellison C. Pierce,
Jr., MD, during his year as president of the American
Society of Anesthesiologists.8,12 Initial financial support
for formation of the APSF was provided by the Ameri-
can Society of Anesthesiologists, and this financial sup-
port continues to the present. In addition, APSF receives
financial support from corporations, specialty societies,
and individual donors. The purpose of APSF is to “assure
that no patient shall be harmed by anesthesia.” To fulfill
this mission, the APSF provides research grants to support
investigations designed to provide a better understanding
of preventable anesthetic injuries and promotes national
and international communication of information and ideas
about the causes and prevention of harm from anesthesia.
A quarterly APSF newsletter is the most widely distributed
anesthesia publication in the world and is dedicated to
8
discussion of anesthesia patient safety issues. Anesthesi-
ology is the only specialty in medicine with a foundation
dedicated solely to issues of patient safety. The National
Patient Safety Foundation, formed in 1997 by the Ameri-
can Medical Association, is modeled after the APSF.␣
Anesthesia Quality Institute
The Anesthesia Quality Institute (AQI) was formed in 2008
for the purpose of being a primary source of information
for quality improvement in the practice of anesthesiol-
ogy. It maintains data that can be used to “assess and
improve patient care.” Eventually, the AQI will be able to
provide quality and safety data that could be used to meet
regulatory requirements. The AQI is already being used as
a source of data for clinical care, research, and societies
that have improving quality of care as a goal. The AQI
website describes the structure of the National Anesthesia
Clinical Outcomes Registry (NACOR) and how data flow
into and out of the AQI.13
␣
American Society of Anesthesiologists Closed
Claims Project and Its Registries
The ASA Closed Claims Project and its Registries are a
database of retrospective analyses of legal cases with
adverse outcomes. This ongoing investigation has helped
identify patient and practice risk areas that tend to have
difficulties and require added attention from the specialty
with regard to quality and safety.5,9
␣
Foundation for Anesthesia Education
and Research
Although not directly involved with quality and safety,
the Foundation for Anesthesia Education and Research
(FAER) is an exceptionally important vehicle for sup-
port of research in the specialty of anesthesiology. FAER
was established in 1986 with financial support from the
American Society of Anesthesiologists. In addition, FAER
receives financial support from corporations, specialty
societies, and individual donors. The purpose of FAER is
to encourage research, education, and scientific innova-
tion in anesthesiology, perioperative medicine, and pain
management. Over the years, FAER has funded numerous
research grants and provided support for the development
of academic anesthesiologists.␣
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY
Because of intense dedication to quality and safety, mal-
practice claims have been reduced both in frequency and
magnitude. As a result, malpractice premiums have dra-
matically decreased over the last 20 years. Nevertheless
the fundamental principles need to be understood. First,
litigation still occurs. For example, 93 claims were filed
in the United Kingdom over the years 1995 to 2007.9,14
Sixty-two claims involved alleged drug administration
errors in which muscle relaxants were the most common
issue. Also, 19 claims involved patients being awake
and paralyzed (see Chapter 47). With proper labeling
and double-checking, such errors can be decreased. The
anesthesiologist is clearly responsible for management
and recovery from anesthesia. Physicians administer-
ing anesthetics are not expected to guarantee a favor-
able outcome to the patient but are required to exercise
ordinary and reasonable care or skill in comparison to
other anesthesiologists. That the anticipated result does
not follow or that complications occur does not imply
negligence (practice below the standard of care). Fur-
thermore, an anesthesiologist is not responsible for an
error in judgment unless it is viewed as inconsistent
with the skill expected of every physician. As a special-
ist, however, an anesthesiologist is responsible for mak-
ing medical judgments that are consistent with national,
not local, standards. Anesthesiologists maintain pro-
fessional liability (malpractice) insurance that provides
financial protection in the event of a court judgment
against them. Also, CRNAs can be held legally respon-
sible for the technical aspects of the administration of
anesthesia. It is likely, however, that legal responsibility
for the actions of the CRNA will be shared by the physi-
cian responsible for supervising the administration of
anesthesia.
The best protection for the anesthesiologist against
medicolegal action lies in the thorough and up-to-date
practice of anesthesia, coupled with interest in the patient
by virtue of preoperative and postoperative visits plus
detailed records of the course of anesthesia (automated
information systems provide the resource to collect and
record real-time actual data). Also, all anesthesia provid-
ers should be prepared to transition to anesthesia record
keeping via automated information systems. Specifically,
use of automated anesthetic records should be fully inte-
grated into one’s medical center information technol-
ogy system. Unfortunately, implementation of electronic
health records (EHRs) is difficult, costly, time-consuming,
and fraught with many unintended consequences, includ-
ing not meeting safety standards. However, a review of
2008-2014 national data reveals large gains in using
EHRs with 75% of hospitals having at least a basic EHR
system, up from 59% in 2013.15 In the United States, at
the forefront of implementation and use of health infor-
mation technology is the Office of the National Coordina-
tor (ONC) for Health Information Technology.
Adverse Events
In the event of an accident or complication related to
the administration of anesthesia, the anesthesiologist
should promptly document the facts on the patient’s
Chapter 1 Scope of Anesthesia Practice
medical record (see the APSF Adverse Event Protocol16)
and immediately notify the appropriate agencies, begin-
ning at the department level and continuing with one’s
own medical center quality improvement administration
and risk management office. Patient treatment should
be noted and consultation with other physicians sought
when appropriate. The anesthesiologist should provide
the hospital and the company that writes the physi-
cian’s professional liability insurance with a complete
account of the incident. The investigation and discussion
of adverse events and complications may involve a root
cause analysis (RCA) in collaboration with the physi-
cians, nurses, and other staff involved with the patient’s
care.␣
RISKS OF ANESTHESIA
Although patients may express a fear of dying during
anesthesia, the fact is that anesthesia-related deaths have
decreased dramatically in the last 2 decades.11,17 Because
fewer adverse events are being attributed to anesthe-
sia, the professional liability insurance premiums paid
by anesthesiologists have decreased.12,18 The increased
safety of anesthesia (especially for patients without sig-
nificant coexisting diseases and undergoing elective sur-
gery) is presumed to reflect the introduction of improved
anesthesia drugs and monitoring (pulse oximetry, cap-
nography), as well as the training of increased num-
bers of anesthesiologists. Despite the perceived safety of
anesthesia, adverse events still occur, and not all agree
that the mortality rate from anesthesia has improved as
greatly as suggested. Improvement is based on a series
of 244,000 surviving patients who underwent anesthe-
sia and surgery. This series is the basis for estimating
a mortality rate from anesthesia of 1 in 250,000.14,19 It
is likely that the safety of anesthesia and surgery can
be improved by persuading patients to stop smoking,
lose weight, avoid excess intake of alcohol, and achieve
optimal medical control of essential hypertension, dia-
betes mellitus, and asthma before undergoing elective
operations.
When perioperative adverse events occur, it is often
difficult to establish a cause-and-effect mechanism. In
many instances it is impossible to separate an adverse
event caused by an inappropriate action of the anesthe-
siologist (“lapse of vigilance,” breach in the standard of
care) from an unavoidable mishap (maloccurrence, coin-
cidental event) that occurred despite optimal care.15,20
Examples of adverse outcomes other than death include
peripheral nerve damage, brain damage, airway trauma
(most often caused by difficult tracheal intubation),
intraoperative awareness, eye injury, fetal/newborn
injury, and aspiration. Difficult airway management has
traditionally been perceived by anesthesiologists as the
greatest anesthesia patient safety issue.17,21 A survey of
9 9
I
Section I INTRODUCTION
Box 1.1 Patient Safety Concerns of Anesthesiologists in
Large Group Practices
1. Distractions in the operating room
2. Production pressures
3. Communication (handoffs)
4. Medication safety
5. Postoperative respiratory monitoring, neuromuscular
blocker monitoring
From Stoelting RK. Large anesthesia/practice management
groups: how can APSF help everyone be safer? APSF Newsletter.
2016;30(3):45, 55-56. http://www.apsf.org.
large anesthesia groups has highlighted other concerns to
patient safety (Box 1.1).
Improved monitoring of anesthetized patients hope-
fully will serve to further enhance the vigilance of the
anesthesiologist and decrease the role of human error
in anesthetic morbidity and mortality rates. Indeed,
human error, in part resulting from lapses in attention
(vigilance), accounts for a large proportion of adverse
anesthesia events. A number of factors at work in the
operating room environment serve to diminish the abil-
ity of the anesthesiologist to perform the task of vigi-
lance. Prominent among these factors are sleep loss and
fatigue with known detrimental effects on work effi-
ciency and cognitive tasks (monitoring, clinical decision
making). The RRC for Anesthesiology mandates that
anesthesia residents not be assigned clinical responsi-
bilities the day after 24-hour in-hospital call. The Health
and Medicine Division (HMD) of the National Academies
has made very specific recommendations regarding resi-
dent work hours and will no doubt make recommen-
dations for physicians overall that could eventually be
mandated. The emphasis on efficiency in the operating
room (“production pressures”) designed to improve pro-
ductivity may supersede safety and provoke the com-
mission of errors that jeopardize patient safety. At the
same time, not all adverse events during anesthesia are
a result of human error and therefore preventable.␣
HAZARDS OF WORKING IN THE
OPERATING ROOM
Anesthesiologists spend long hours in an environment
(operating room) associated with exposure to vapors
from chemicals (volatile anesthetics), ionizing radia-
tion, and infectious agents (hepatitis viruses, human
immunodeficiency virus). There is psychological stress
from demands of the constant vigilance required for the
care of patients during anesthesia. Furthermore, inter-
actions with members of the operating team (surgeons,
nurses) may introduce varying levels of interpersonal
stress. Removal of waste anesthetic gases (scavenging)
10
has decreased exposure to trace concentrations of these
gases, although evidence that this practice has improved
the health of anesthesia personnel is lacking. Univer-
sal precautions are recommended in the care of every
patient in an attempt to prevent the transmission of
blood-borne infections, particularly by accidental
needlestick injuries. Substance abuse, mental illness
(depression), and suicide seem to occur with increased
frequency among anesthesiologists, perhaps reflecting
the impact of occupational stress.
Lastly, infection control for both patients and clini-
cal personnel in the operating rooms require increasingly
strict rules regarding specific procedures in the operating
room such as washing hands.␣
SUMMARY AND FUTURE OUTLOOK
This chapter reflects the constantly evolving and changing
practice of anesthesia. Our responsibilities have grown in
magnitude, scope, and depth. Although anesthesia prac-
tice is partly based on outpatient activities (see Chapters
37 and 44), it has also become a leading specialty with
regard to inpatient medicine, especially the perioperative
period including critical care medicine (see Chapter 41).
Definitely more sophisticated technological tools and sys-
tems will be integrated in the practice of anesthesiology.
In more recent years, the use of robots in the operating
theater has become standard for specific surgeries.18,22
The specialty will become even more valuable to medi-
cine overall by attempting to anticipate future societal
needs15,20 and continuing to dedicate ourselves to the pur-
suit of excellence.10 Lastly, this chapter has described the
American organization and delivery of anesthesia. Every
country in the world has or should subject their anesthesia
practice to an intense and possibly similar type of analysis.␣
QUESTIONS OF THE DAY
1. In the United States, which anesthesiology fellow-
ships are accredited by the Accreditation Council for
Graduate Medical Education? What is the impact of
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education
accreditation on the structure of a fellowship program?
2. What are the sources of data in the National Anesthe-
sia Clinical Outcomes Registry?
3. How has the Foundation for Anesthesia Education
and Research helped to advance the specialty of
anesthesiology?
4. What are the reasons for a decrease in anesthesia mal-
practice premiums over the past few decades? What
steps can the anesthesia provider take to reduce the
chance for a lawsuit after an adverse event?
5. What are the potential hazards of working in the oper-
ating room as an anesthesia provider?
REFERENCES
1. American Board of Anesthesiology. http:
//www.theaba.org/PDFs/BOI/MOCA-BOI.
Accessed April 28, 2016.
2. Matthay MA, Liu KD. New strate-
gies for effective therapeutics in criti-
cally ill patients. JAMA. 2016;315(8):
747–748.
3. Dexter F. A brief history of evidence-
based operating room management: then
and now. Anesth Analg. 2012;115:10–11.
4. Dexter F. High-quality operating room
management research. J Clin Anesth.
2014;26:341–342.
5. Mello MM, Livingston EH. Manag-
ing the risks of concurrent surgeries.
JAMA. 2016;315:1563–1564.
6. American Board of Anesthesiology.
http://www.theaba.org/MOCA/MOCA-
2-0-Part-4. Accessed April 28, 2016.
7. American Academy of Anesthesiologist
Assistants. http://www.anesthetist.org.
8. Committee on Quality of Health Care in
America, Institute of Medicine. To Err
Is Human. Washington, DC: National
Academy Press; 2000.
9. Spiess BD, Wahr JA, Nussmeier NA.
Bring your life into FOCUS. Anesth
Analg. 2010;110:283–287.
Chapter 1 Scope of Anesthesia Practice
10. Miller RD. The pursuit of excellence.
The 47th Annual Rovenstine Lecture.
Anesthesiology. 2008;110:714–720.
11. Apfelbaum JL, Aveyard C, Cooper L,
et al. Outsourcing anesthesia prepara-
tion. Anesthesiol News. 2009:1–6.
12. Pierce EC. The 34th Rovenstine Lec-
ture: 40 years behind the mask: safety
revisited. Anesthesiology. 1996;84:
965–997.
13. Anesthesia Quality Institute. National
Anesthesia Clinical Outcomes Registry.
https://www.aqihq.org/introduction-
to-nacor.aspx.
14. Cranshaw J, Gupta KJ, Cook TM. Litiga-
tion related to drug errors in anaesthe-
sia: an analysis of claims against the
NHS in England 1995-2007. Anaesthe-
sia. 2009;64:1317–1323.
15. Adler-Milstein J, DesRoches C, Kralovec
P, et al. Electronic health record adop-
tion in US hospitals: progress contin-
ues, but challenges persist. Health Aff
(Milwood). 2015;34(12):2174–2180.
16. Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation
(APSF). Clinical Safety. Adverse Event
Protocol. http://www.apsf.org/resources
_safety_protocol.php.
17. Cooper JB, Gaba DG. No myth: anes-
thesia is a model for addressing patient
safety. Anesthesiology. 2002;97:1335–
1337.
18. Hallinan JT. Once seen as risky, one
group of doctors changes its ways. The
Wall Street Journal. June 21, 2005.
19. Lagasse RS. Anesthesia safety: model
or myth? A review of the published lit-
erature and analysis of current original
data. Anesthesiology. 2002;97:1609–
1617.
20. Miller RD. Report from the Task Force
on Future Paradigms of Anesthesia
Practice. ASA Newsletter. 2005;69:2–6.
21. Stoelting RK. APSF survey results
identify safety issues priorities. Spring
APSF Newsletter. 1999:6–7. http://www
.apsf.org.
22. Berlinger NT. Robotic surgery: squeez-
ing into tight places. N Engl J Med.
2006;354:2099–2101.
11 11
I
Chapter
2 LEARNING ANESTHESIA
Manuel C. Pardo, Jr.
COMPETENCIES AND MILESTONES
STRUCTURED APPROACH TO ANESTHESIA
CARE
Preoperative Evaluation
Creating the Anesthesia Plan
Preparing the Operating Room
Managing the Intraoperative Anesthetic
Patient Follow-up
LEARNING STRATEGIES
Learning Orientation Versus Performance
Orientation
TEACHING ANESTHESIA
QUESTIONS OF THE DAY
The challenges of learning perioperative anesthesia care
have grown considerably as the specialty, and medi-
cine in general, have evolved. The beginning anesthe-
sia trainee is faced with an ever-increasing quantity of
knowledge, the need for adequate patient care experi-
ences, and increased attention to patient safety as well
as cost containment.1 Most training programs begin
with close clinical supervision by an attending anes-
thesiologist. More experienced trainees may offer their
perspectives and practical advice. Some programs use
a mannequin-based patient simulator or other forms of
simulation to facilitate the learning process.2 The prac-
tice of anesthesia involves the development of flexible
patient care routines, factual and theoretical knowledge,
manual and procedural skills, and the mental abilities to
adapt to changing situations.3
COMPETENCIES AND MILESTONES
The anesthesia provider must be skilled in many areas.
The Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Edu-
cation (ACGME) developed its Outcome Project, which
includes a focus on six core competencies: patient
care, medical knowledge, professionalism, interpersonal
and communication skills, systems-based practice, and
practice-based learning and improvement (Table 2.1).4
More recently, the ACGME has advanced the core compe-
tencies approach by adopting the Dreyfus model of skill
acquisition to create a framework of “milestones” in the
development of anesthesia residents during 4 years of
training.5,6 Table 2.2 shows an example of a milestone in
the patient care competency. The milestones incorporate
several aspects of residency training, including a descrip-
tion of expected behavior, the complexity of the patient
and the surgical procedure, and the level of supervision
needed by the resident.␣
12
Chapter 2 Learning Anesthesia
STRUCTURED APPROACH TO
Table 2.1 Competencies in Anesthesia Care
ANESTHESIA CARE
Procedure Event/
Problem Competency
Perform preoperative history
and physical
Patient care, communication
Determine dose of neuromus-
cular blocking drug
to facilitate tracheal intubation
Medical knowledge
Perform laryngoscopy and
tracheal intubation
Patient care
Interact with surgeons and
nurses in operating room
Professionalism, communi-
cation
Anesthesia providers care for the surgical patient in the
preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative periods
(Box 2.1). Important patient care decisions reflect on
assessing the preoperative evaluation, creating the anes-
thesia plan, preparing the operating room, and managing
the intraoperative anesthetic, postoperative care, and out-
come. An understanding of this framework will facilitate
the learning process.
Preoperative Evaluation
Manage maintenance and
emergence from anesthesia
Patient care
Patient with dental injury:
refer to quality assurance
committee
Systems-based practice
Patient with postoperative
nausea: compare prophy-
laxis strategy with published
literature
Practice-based
learning and improvement
The goals of preoperative evaluation include assessing the
risk of coexisting diseases, modifying risks, addressing
patients’ concerns, and discussing options for anesthe-
sia care (see Chapters 13 and 14). The beginning trainee
should learn the types of questions that are the most
important to understanding the patient and the proposed
surgery. Some specific questions and their potential
importance follow.
What is the indication for the proposed surgery? Is
it elective or an emergency? The indication for surgery
may have particular anesthetic implications. For example,
Table 2.2 Example of Anesthesia Resident Milestones: Patient Care Competency, Anesthetic Plan, and Conduct
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 Level 5
Formulates patient
care plans that
include consideration
of underlying clini-
cal conditions, past
medical history, and
patient, medical, or
surgical risk factors
Adapts to new set-
tings for delivery of
patient care
Formulates anesthetic
plans for patients under-
going routine procedures
that include consid-
eration of underlying
clinical conditions, past
medical history, patient,
anesthetic and surgical
risk factors, and patient
choice
Conducts routine
anesthetics, includ-
ing management of
commonly encountered
physiologic alterations
associated with anes-
thetic care, with indirect
supervision
Formulates anes-
thetic plans for patients
undergoing common
subspecialty procedures
that include consid-
eration of medical,
anesthetic, and surgi-
cal risk factors and that
take into consideration
a patient’s anesthetic
preference
Conducts subspecialty
anesthetics with indirect
supervision but may
require direct supervision
for more complex proce-
dures and patients
Formulates and tailors
anesthetic plans that
include consideration
of medical, anesthetic,
and surgical risk factors
and patient preference
for patients with complex
medical issues undergoing
complex procedures with
conditional independence
Conducts complex an-
esthetics with condi-
tional independence; may
supervise others in the
management of complex
clinical problems
Independently for-
mulates anesthetic
plans that include
consideration of
medical, anesthetic,
and surgical risk
factors as well as
patient preference
for complex patients
and procedures
Conducts complex
anesthetic manage-
ment independently
Levels correspond to the following time points during residency:
Level 1: Resident has completed one postgraduate year of education.
Level 2: Resident is without significant experience in subspecialties of anesthesiology.
Level 3: Resident has experience in subspecialties of anesthesiology.
Level 4: Resident substantially fulfills milestones expected of an anesthesiology residency; designated as graduation target.
Level 5: Resident has advanced beyond performance targets defined for residency and is demonstrating “aspirational” goals.
From Anesthesiology Residency Review Committee. The Anesthesiology Milestone Project. https://www.acgme.org/Portals/0/PDFs/Milestones/A
nesthesiologyMilestones.pdf. July 2015. Accessed May 2, 2016.
13 13
I
Section I INTRODUCTION
Box 2.1 Phases of Anesthesia Care
Preoperative Phase
Preoperative evaluation
Choice of anesthesia
Premedication␣
Intraoperative Phase
Physiologic monitoring and vascular access
General anesthesia (i.e., plan for induction, maintenance, and
emergence)
Regional anesthesia (i.e., plan for type of block, needle, local
anesthetic)␣
Postoperative Phase
Postoperative pain control method
Special monitoring or treatment based on surgery or anes-
thetic course
Disposition (e.g., home, postanesthesia care unit, ward,
monitored ward, step-down unit, intensive care unit)
Follow-up (anesthesia complications, patient outcome)
a patient requiring esophageal fundoplication will likely
have severe gastroesophageal reflux disease, which may
require modification of the anesthesia plan (e.g., pre-
operative nonparticulate antacid, intraoperative rapid-
sequence induction of anesthesia).
A given procedure may also have implications for
anesthetic choice. Anesthesia for hand surgery, for exam-
ple, can be accomplished with local anesthesia, peripheral
nerve blockade, general anesthesia, or sometimes a com-
bination of techniques. The urgency of a given proce-
dure (e.g., acute appendicitis) may preclude lengthy delay
of the surgery for additional testing, without increas-
ing the risk of complications (e.g., appendiceal rupture,
peritonitis).
What are the inherent risks of this surgery? Surgical
procedures have different inherent risks. For example,
a patient undergoing coronary artery bypass graft has
a significant risk of problems such as death, stroke, or
myocardial infarction. A patient undergoing cataract
extraction has an infrequent risk of major organ damage.
Does the patient have coexisting medical problems?
Does the surgery or anesthesia care plan need to be
modified because of them? To anticipate the effects of
a given medical problem, the anesthesia provider must
understand the physiologic effects of the surgery and
anesthetic and the potential interaction with the medical
problem. For example, a patient with poorly controlled
systemic hypertension is more likely to have an exag-
gerated hypertensive response to direct laryngoscopy to
facilitate tracheal intubation. The anesthesia provider may
change the anesthetic plan to increase the induction dose
of intravenously administered anesthetic (e.g., propofol)
and administer a short-acting β-adrenergic blocker (e.g.,
esmolol) before instrumentation of the airway. Depending
on the medical problem, the anesthesia plan may require
modification during any phase of the procedure.
14
Has the patient had anesthesia before? Were there
complications such as difficult airway management?
Does the patient have risk factors for difficult airway
management? Anesthesia records from previous surgery
can yield much useful information. The most important
fact is the ease of airway management techniques such
as direct laryngoscopy. If physical examination reveals
some risk factors for difficult tracheal intubation, but the
patient had a clearly documented uncomplicated direct
laryngoscopy for recent surgery, the anesthesia provider
may choose to proceed with routine laryngoscopy. Other
useful historical information includes intraoperative
hemodynamic and respiratory instability and occurrence
of postoperative nausea.␣
Creating the Anesthesia Plan
After the preoperative evaluation, the anesthesia plan can
be completed. The plan should list drug choices and doses
in detail, as well as anticipated problems (Boxes 2.2 and
2.3). Many variations on a given plan may be acceptable,
but the trainee and the supervising anesthesia provider
should agree in advance on the details.␣
Preparing the Operating Room
After determining the anesthesia plan, the trainee must
prepare the operating room (Table 2.3). Routine operat-
ing room preparation includes tasks such as checking
the anesthesia machine (see Chapter 15). The specific
anesthesia plan may have implications for preparing
additional equipment. For example, fiberoptic tracheal
intubation requires special equipment that may be kept in
a cart dedicated to difficult airway management.␣
Managing the Intraoperative Anesthetic
Intraoperative anesthesia management generally fol-
lows the anesthesia plan but should be adjusted based
on the patient’s responses to anesthesia and surgery.
The anesthesia provider must evaluate a number of dif-
ferent information pathways from which a decision on
whether to change the patient’s management can be
made. The trainee must learn to process these differ-
ent information sources and attend to multiple tasks
simultaneously. The general cycle of mental activ-
ity involves observation, decision making, action,
and repeat evaluation. Vigilance—being watchful and
alert—is necessary for safe patient care, but vigilance
alone is not enough. The anesthesia provider must
weigh the significance of each observation and can
become overwhelmed by the amount of information
or by rapidly changing information. Intraoperative
clinical events can stimulate thinking and promote an
interactive discussion between the trainee and supervi-
sor (Table 2.4).␣
Chapter 2 Learning Anesthesia
Box 2.2 Sample General Anesthesia Plan
Case
A 47-year-old woman with biliary colic and well-controlled
asthma requires anesthesia for laparoscopic cholecystectomy.␣
Preoperative Phase
Premedication:
Midazolam, 1-2 mg intravenous (IV), to reduce anxiety
Albuterol, two puffs, to prevent bronchospasm␣
Intraoperative Phase
Vascular Access and Monitoring
Vascular access: one peripheral IV catheter
Monitors: pulse oximetry, capnography, electrocardiogram,
noninvasive blood pressure with standard adult cuff size,
temperature␣
Induction
Propofol, 2 mg/kg IV (may precede with lidocaine, 1 mg/kg IV)
Neuromuscular blocking drug to facilitate tracheal intubation
(succinylcholine, 1-2 mg/kg IV) or nondepolarizing neuro-
muscular blocking drugs (rocuronium, 0.6 mg/kg)
Airway management
Face mask: adult medium size
Direct laryngoscopy: Macintosh 3 blade, 7.0-mm internal diam-
eter (ID) endotracheal tube␣
Maintenance
Inhaled anesthetic: sevoflurane or desflurane
Opioid: fentanyl, anticipate 2-4 µg/kg IV total during procedure
Neuromuscular blocking drug titrated to train-of-four monitor
(peripheral nerve stimulator) at the ulnar nervea
Emergence
Antagonize effects of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking
drug: neostigmine, 70 µg/kg, and glycopyrrolate, 14 µg/kg
IV, titrated to train-of-four monitor
Antiemetic: dexamethasone, 4 mg IV, at start of procedure;
ondansetron, 4 mg IV, at end of procedure
Tracheal extubation: when patient is awake, breathing, and fol-
lowing commands
Possible intraoperative problem and approach:
Bronchospasm: increase inspired oxygen and inhaled anes-
thetic concentrations, decrease surgical stimulation if
possible, administer albuterol through endotracheal tube
(5-10 puffs), adjust ventilator to maximize expiratory flow␣
Postoperative Phase
Postoperative pain control: patient-controlled analgesia—hydromor-
phone, 0.2 mg IV; 6-min lockout interval, do not use basal rate
Disposition: postanesthesia care unit, then hospital ward
Patient Follow-up
The patient should be reassessed after recovery from
anesthesia. This follow-up includes assessing general
satisfaction with the anesthetic, as well as a review for
complications such as dental injury, nausea, nerve injury,
Learning during supervised direct patient care is the
foundation of clinical training. Because the scope of
anesthesia practice is so broad (see Chapter 1) and
the competencies trainees are required to master are
diverse, direct patient care cannot be the only compo-
nent of the teaching program. Other modalities include
lectures, group discussions, simulations, and indepen-
dent reading. Lectures can be efficient methods for
transmitting large amounts of information. However,
the lecture format is not conducive to large amounts
of audience interaction. Group discussions are most
effective when they are small (fewer than 12 partici-
pants) and interactive. Journal clubs, quality assurance
conferences, and problem-based case discussions lend
themselves to this format. A teaching method termed
the flipped classroom can combine aspects of lectures
and group discussions.8 One popular approach to the
flipped classroom involves use of an online video lec-
ture that must be viewed prior to the class session.
Class time involves discussions or other active learn-
ing modalities that are only effective if the trainee
has viewed the material beforehand. Simulations can
15 15
I
␣
aNondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drug choices include rocuronium, vecuronium, pancuronium, atracurium, and cisatracurium.
Box 2.3 Sample Regional Anesthesia Plan
Case
A 27-year-old man requires diagnostic right shoulder arthros-
copy for chronic pain. He has no known medical problems.␣
Preoperative Phase
Premedication: midazolam, 1-2 mg intravenous (IV), to
reduce anxiety␣
Intraoperative Phase
Type of block: interscalene
Needle: 22-gauge short-bevel, 5 cm long
Local anesthetic: 1.5% mepivacaine, 25 mL
Ancillary equipment: ultrasound machine with linear trans-
ducer, sterile sheath, ultrasound gel
Technique: chlorhexidine skin preparation, localize nerve in
posterior triangle of neck, use ultrasound to guide in-
plane needle insertion, inject local anesthetic
Intraoperative sedation and analgesia:
Midazolam, 0.5-1 mg IV, given every 5-10 minutes as indicated
Fentanyl, 25-50 µg IV, given every 5-10 minutes as indicated␣
Postoperative Phase
Postoperative pain control: when block resolves, may treat
with fentanyl, 25-50 µg IV, as needed
Disposition: postanesthesia care unit, then home
and intraoperative recall. There is increasing attention on
the long-term impact of anesthesia, including the impact
of “deep” levels of anesthesia, hypotension, and inhaled
anesthetic dose on postoperative mortality rate.7
␣
LEARNING STRATEGIES
Table 2.3 Operating Room Preparation
Components Preparation Tasks/Supplies and Equipment
Basic Room Setup
Suction (S) Check that suction is connected, working, and near the head of the bed.
Oxygen (O) Check oxygen supply pressures (pipeline of approximately 50 psi and E-cylinder of at
least 2000 psi). Check anesthesia machine (do positive-pressure circuit test).
Airway (A) Two laryngoscope blades and handles
Two endotracheal tubes of different sizes (one with and one without a stylet)
Two laryngeal mask airways (LMA 3 and LMA 4)
Two oral airways
Two nasal airways
Lidocaine or K-Y jelly
Bite block and tongue depressor
Tape
Intravenous access (I) Two catheter sizes
1-mL syringe with 1% lidocaine
Tourniquet, alcohol pads, gauze, plastic dressing, tape
Monitors (M) Electrocardiographic pads
Blood pressure cuff (correct size for patient)
Pulse oximeter probe
Capnography monitor (breathe into circuit to confirm function)
Temperature probe
Daily Drugs to Prepare
Premedicants Midazolam, 2 mL at 1 mg/mL
Opioids Fentanyl, 5 mL at 50 µg/mL
Induction drugs Propofol, 20 mL at 10 mg/mL
or
Thiopental, 20 mL at 25 mg/mL
Etomidate, 20 mL at 2 mg/mL
Neuromuscular blocking drugs Succinylcholine, 10 mL at 20 mg/mL
Rocuronium, 5 mL at 10 mg/mL
Vasopressors Ephedrine, 10 mL at 5 mg/mL (dilute 50 mg/mL in 9 mL of saline)
Phenylephrine, 10 mL at 100 µg/mL (dilute 10 mg in 100 mL of saline)
Avoiding Drug Errors
Tips for prevention Look twice at the source vial being used to prepare your drug.
Some vials look alike, and some drug names sound the same. Always label your drugs
as soon as they are prepared. Write the following on the label: drug name and concen-
tration, date, time, your initials.
Discard unlabeled syringes.
Conversion of % to mg/mL Move decimal point one place to the right (1.0% = 10 mg/mL).
By definition, 1% = 1 g/100 mL.
1% lidocaine is 1000 mg/100 mL, or 10 mg/mL.
Conversion of 1:200,000 Memorize: 1:200,000 is 5 µg/mL (1:1000 is 1000 µg/mL or 1 mg/mL).
16
Chapter 2 Learning Anesthesia
Table 2.4 Examples of Intraoperative Events to Discuss
Event Questions to Consider Possible Discussion Topics
Tachycardia after increase in surgical stimu-
lation
Is the depth of anesthesia adequate?
Could there be another cause for the
tachycardia?
Is the patient in sinus rhythm or could this
be a primary arrhythmia?
Assessment of anesthetic depth
Approaches to increasing depth of
anesthesia
Diagnosis of tachycardia
End-tidal CO2 increases after laparoscopic
insufflation
Is the patient having a potentially life-
threatening complication of laparoscopy
such as CO2 embolism?
What is the expected rise in end-tidal CO2
with laparoscopic procedures?
How should the mechanical ventilator set-
tings be adjusted?
Complications of laparoscopy
Mechanical ventilation modes
Causes of intraoperative hypercarbia
Peripheral nerve stimulator indicates train-
of-four 0/4 15 minutes prior to end of
surgery
Is the nerve stimulator functioning prop-
erly?
Is there a reason for prolonged neuromus-
cular blockade?
Can the blockade be reversed safely?
Neuromuscular stimulation patterns
Clinical implications of residual neuro-
muscular blockade
Pharmacology of neuromuscular block-
ade reversal
take several forms: task-based simulators to practice
discrete procedures such as laryngoscopy or intrave-
nous catheter placement, mannequin-based simulators
to recreate an intraoperative crisis such as malignant
hyperthermia or cardiac arrest, and computer-based
simulators designed to repetitively manage advanced
cardiac life support algorithms. Independent reading
should include basic textbooks and selected portions
of comprehensive textbooks as well as anesthesia spe-
cialty journals and general medical journals.
The beginning trainee is typically focused on learn-
ing to care for one patient at a time, that is, case-
based learning. When developing an individual
anesthesia plan, the trainee should also set learning
goals for a case. For example, the patient in Box 2.2
has a history of asthma and requires laparoscopic
surgery. Several questions could become topics for
directed reading before the case or discussion during
the case. What complications of laparoscopic surgery can
present intraoperatively? What are the manifesta-
tions? How should they be treated? How will the sever-
ity of the patient’s asthma be assessed? What if the
patient had wheezing and dyspnea in the preoperative
area? Trainees should regularly reflect on their prac-
tice and on how they can improve their individual
patient care and their institution’s systems of patient
care.
orientation.”9 Trainees with a performance orientation
have a goal of validating their abilities, while trainees
with a learning orientation have the goal of increasing
their mastery of the situation. Feedback is more likely
to be viewed as beneficial for trainees with a learning
orientation, while a trainee with a performance orien-
tation is likely to view feedback as merely a mecha-
nism to highlight an area of weakness. If the training
setting is challenging and demanding, an individual
with a strong learning orientation is more likely to
thrive.␣
TEACHING ANESTHESIA
Learning Orientation Versus
Performance Orientation
The trainee’s approach to a learning challenge can be
described as a “performance orientation” or a “learning
The role of residents as teachers is increasingly rec-
ognized as crucially important to the training of
medical students.10 Residents will spend a significant
amount of their time in teaching activities, even early
in their own training. Many specialties have devel-
oped curricula to address this teaching role, which
has a positive impact on both resident and student.
One published approach consists of a series of work-
shops focused on six teaching skills: giving feedback,
teaching around the case, orienting a learner, teach-
ing a skill, teaching at the bedside, and delivering a
minilecture.11
A clinical teaching approach that has been well
described in several specialties is called the One-Minute
Preceptor model.12 It describes five sequential steps
that can be used to structure brief clinical encounters.
Table 2.5 lists the steps and an example relevant to an
anesthesia student clerkship.␣
17 17
I
Section I INTRODUCTION
QUESTIONS OF THE DAY
Table 2.5 Example of One-Minute Preceptor Teaching
Model in Anesthesia
You are working with a medical student on an anesthesia
rotation. An otherwise healthy patient is receiving general
anesthesia for laparoscopic cholecystectomy. After CO2
insufflation and placement of the patient in Trendelenburg
(head-down) position, the oxygen saturation decreases from
100% to 93%.
Steps in Teaching Dialogue With Student
Step 1. Get a commit-
ment
Why do you think the oxygen satu-
ration is decreasing?
Step 2. Probe for
supporting evidence
What findings suggest that the en-
dotracheal tube position changed?
1. What is a “milestone” in the context of anesthesia resi-
dency training?
2. How would you adapt the sample general anesthe-
sia plan in Box 2.2 if the patient had poorly con-
trolled asthma and required emergency laparoscopic
appendectomy?
3. What are the components of the One-Minute Preceptor
teaching model?
4. You are working with a new anesthesia learner. How
could you use the structure of Table 2.4 to develop
questions and discussion topics for the following
event: a healthy patient develops hypotension after
induction of anesthesia and tracheal intubation?
Step 3. Teach general
rules
Discuss how to approach acute hy-
poxemia during general anesthesia.
Step 4. Reinforce what
was done well
You astutely observed other signs
of endobronchial intubation such
as elevated peak airway pressure.
Step 5. Correct mistakes In the future, you would not give
empiric bronchodilator therapy un-
less there are more definitive signs
of bronchospasm.
REFERENCES
1. Bould MD, Naik VN, Hamstra SJ. Re-
view article: new directions in medical
education related to anesthesiology and
perioperative medicine. Can J Anaesth.
2012;59(2):136–150.
2. Murray DJ, Boulet JR. Simulation-
based curriculum: the breadth of appli-
cations in graduate medical education.
J Grad Med Educ. 2012;4(4):549–550.
3. Smith A, Goodwin D, Mort M, et al.
Expertise in practice: an ethnographic
study exploring acquisition and use
of knowledge in anaesthesia. Br J
Anaesth. 2003;91:319–328.
4. Leach DC. Competencies: from decon-
struction to reconstruction and back
again, lessons learned. Am J Public
Health. 2008;98(9):1562–1564.
5. Khan K, Ramachandran S. Conceptual
framework for performance assessment:
competency, competence and perfor-
mance in the context of assessments in
healthcare—deciphering the terminol-
ogy. Med Teach. 2012;34(11):920–928.
6. Anesthesiology Residency Review Com-
mittee. The Anesthesiology Milestone
Project. July 2015. https://www.acgme
.org/Portals/0/PDFs/Milestones/Anesthe
siologyMilestones.pdf. Accessed May 2,
2016.
7. Willingham MD, Karren E, Shanks AM,
et al. Concurrence of intraoperative
hypotension, low minimum alveolar
concentration, and low bispectral index
is associated with postoperative death.
Anesthesiology. 2015;123(4):775–785.
8. McLaughlin JE, Roth MT, Glatt DM,
et al. The flipped classroom: a course
redesign to foster learning and engage-
ment in a health professions school.
Acad Med. 2014;89(2):236–243.
9. Weidman J, Baker K. The cognitive sci-
ence of learning: concepts and strategies
for the educator and learner. Anesth An-
alg. 2015;121(6):1586–1599.
10. Post RE, Quattlebaum RG, Benich 3rd
JJ. Residents-as-teachers curricula: a
critical review. Acad Med. 2009;84(3):
374–380.
11. Berger JS, Daneshpayeh N, Sherman
M, et al. Anesthesiology residents-as-
teachers program: a pilot study. J Grad
Med Educ. 2012;4(4):525–528.
12. Furney SL, Orsini AN, Orsetti KE, et al.
Teaching the one-minute preceptor. A
randomized controlled trial. J Gen In-
tern Med. 2001;16(9):620–624.
18
Chapter
3 ANESTHESIA AND
HEALTH INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGY
David Robinowitz and Scott Springman
HISTORY OF ANESTHESIA
DOCUMENTATION AND AIMS
THE DEMAND FOR DATA
PROFESSIONAL PERFORMANCE DATA
REPORTING WITH HEALTH IT
FEATURES OF THE ELECTRONIC HEALTH
RECORD IN ANESTHESIA AND
PERIOPERATIVE CARE
HEALTH CARE INFORMATION PRIVACY
AND SECURITY
SELECTED KEY TOPICS FOR HEALTH IT
Interoperability
System Design, User Interface, and Usability
Clinical Decision Support
Transitioning to Health IT: From Paper
Records to an AIMS, and Beyond
Legal Issues and Responsibilities of the AIMS
User
CONCLUSION AND THE FUTURE
QUESTIONS OF THE DAY
Anesthesia providers produce and record extraordinary
amounts of physiologic, pharmacologic, and care man-
agement information. Since the previous edition of this
text was published in 2011, there has been exponential
growth in the use of computerized anesthesia informa-
tion management systems (AIMS) both as a stand-alone
system and as part of an overall patient care electronic
health record (EHR). In the late 1990s, only a handful of
academic anesthesia practices had an AIMS installation,
with even fewer in private practice settings. However,
by 2007 approximately 44% of academic medical cen-
ters had completed or were in the process of implement-
ing AIMS. A 2014 follow-up survey estimated that 84%
of U.S. academic medical centers would have an AIMS
installed by the end of that year. The prediction was
that within a few years, few anesthesia trainees would
graduate from residency having used a paper anesthetic
record.1 EHRs will likely incorporate the growing num-
ber of adjunct electronic devices and other software,
combining all into the global term health information
technology, or health IT. Given the enormous impact
of health IT on patient care, anesthesia providers must
have an understanding of these technologies including
their potential benefits and hazards. The scientific disci-
pline that serves as the foundation of health IT is medi-
cal informatics (the branch of information science that
relates to health care and biomedicine), which encom-
passes health informatics, medical computer science,
and computers in medicine.
Given their special skills and knowledge, anesthe-
sia providers should be key players in the development,
assessment, selection, and deployment of perioperative
health IT. Anesthesia teams now need a working knowl-
edge of the applicable theory and practice of medical
informatics. In this chapter, several key health IT topics
The editors and publisher would like to thank Dr. James Caldwell
for contributing to this chapter in the previous edition of this
work. It has served as the foundation for the current chapter.
19
Section I INTRODUCTION
for the anesthesia provider will be reviewed, with a focus
on AIMS, including some considerations for managing
the procurement and operation of information technol-
ogy in an anesthetic practice.
HISTORY OF ANESTHESIA
DOCUMENTATION AND AIMS
The origins of the modern AIMS date back to the creation
of the paper record in 1895 by neurosurgeon and physi-
ologist Harvey Cushing and his medical school classmate
E.A. Codman.2 As pioneers of anesthesia quality improve-
ment, Codman and Cushing had challenged each other to
improve their anesthesia practice. In support of this goal,
they were the first to collect and review physiologic data
using written anesthesia records just 50 years after the
discovery of anesthesia. About the same time, Cushing
and others began to employ newly invented automated
hemodynamic monitors with paper-based recordings,
including noninvasive arterial blood pressure measure-
ments. Over the subsequent 50 years, the anesthetic
record maintained the same basic format for represen-
tation of hemodynamics, albeit with a slow and steady
increase in the amount and types of data recorded. These
two innovations—documentation of significant events
during actual anesthesia and surgery coupled with auto-
mated real-time recordings of hemodynamic vital signs—
formed the foundation of the modern AIMS.
The late 1970s and early 1980s saw the rollout and
initial evaluation of the computerized anesthesia auto-
mated record keeper (AARK), but commercialization and
widespread adoption were slowed by the limited avail-
ability of cheap and reliable computer hardware and
software.3 Yet, many benefits of AARKs became appar-
ent, even within the limitations of this nascent technol-
ogy. AARKs corrected limitations of paper records such
as recall bias, illegible records, missing data or whole
records (with regulatory and billing implications), and
the lack of an audit trail for medical/legal purposes.
Clinical studies of AARKs also revealed that they pro-
duced a more accurate record of hemodynamic variables
than handwritten charts.4 For instance, handwritten
anesthetic records had increased “data smoothing” (i.e.,
recorded data were often approximated, leading to less
variation between individually recorded data points) as
compared to AARKs.
The 1990s and early 2000s heralded a proliferation of
advanced computer hardware and software, such as local
area networks, the Internet, digital hemodynamic monitors,
medical communication protocols such as Health Level
Seven International (HL7), and a significant reduction in
the cost of computer processing power. Coupled with the
voracious demand for more data that paper records could
not satisfy, the relatively simple AARKs evolved into full-
fledged AIMS, with numerous additional capabilities.␣
20
THE DEMAND FOR DATA
In 2001, the Anesthesia Patient Safety Foundation (APSF)
endorsed and advocated “the use of automated record keep-
ing in the perioperative period and the subsequent retrieval
and analysis of the data to improve patient safety.”5 There
were also demands for anesthesia and perioperative data
for such purposes as compliance documentation, research,
quality assurance, and the streamlining of billing and
administrative functions. However, U.S. federal govern-
ment action may have most catalyzed the rapid pace of
EHR adoption in this country in the 21st century. The
Health Information Technology for Economic and Clini-
cal Health (HITECH) Act, enacted as part of the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, encouraged the
adoption and appropriate use of health IT, including provi-
sions for monetary incentives and penalties.
In 2011, the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
(CMS) initiated the Medicare and Medicaid EHR Incentive
Programs. Their Meaningful Use (MU) criteria encourage
U.S. health care providers and organizations to adopt
health IT through a staged process, via variable payments
or penalties. For ongoing MU compliance, organizations
must—by 2017—satisfy Stage 3 rules, which consolidate
and update many of the Stage 1 and 2 requirements, as
well as add requirements for privacy and security practices
and the electronic submission of clinical quality measure
(CQM) data for all providers (Box 3.1). Reporting compli-
ance within the MU system is complex. For instance, there
are specific reporting, incentive, and hardship exemption
rules that may apply to anesthesia providers. Advice from
the American Society of Anesthesiologists, HHS, Office of
the National Coordinator for Health Information Technol-
ogy (ONC), and health IT professionals may help navigate
these requirements.6,7 The requirements are dynamic, and
in early 2016, in response to stakeholder feedback, the
federal government was developing the Advancing Care
Information program. This new program’s intent is to
simplify or replace the MU program, focusing on improv-
ing interoperability (see later) and creating user-friendly
technology designed to support physician workflows. Up-
to-date information about federal guidelines and require-
ments for health IT is available online.8
Box 3.1 Objectives and Measures for Meaningful Use in
2017 and Beyond
• Protect patient health information
• Electronic prescribing (eRx)
• Clinical decision support (CDS)
• Computerized provider order entry (CPOE)
• Patient electronic access to health information
• Coordination of care through patient engagement
• Health information exchange (HIE)
• Public health and clinical data registry reporting
Chapter 3 Anesthesia and Health Information Technology
Discrete data collection and reporting within a health
care organization is often cited as a key reason to imple-
ment health IT. Reporting supports analysis of workflows;
guides efforts at utilization, scheduling, and resource
management improvements; permits the measurement of
costs, quality, and clinical outcomes; satisfies compliance
regulations; serves research studies; and may be required
by external public and private agencies. Important data
will often reside across multiple systems, leading to the
rise of the Data Warehouse, a central repository of inte-
grated data, pooled from one or more separate sources.
Although local reporting has great potential, these
local data are leading to the creation of national and
international large databases, termed data registries.9
Several observational data registries are focused on the
fields of anesthesia and perioperative care: the Anes-
thesia Quality Institute (AQI), National Anesthesia Clin-
ical Outcomes Registry (NACOR), the data registry of
the Multicenter Perioperative Outcomes Group (MPOG),
the Society for Ambulatory Anesthesia (SAMBA) data-
base (SAMBA Outcomes Registry, SCOR), the Pediat-
ric Regional Anesthesia Network, and the Society for
Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists Adult Cardiac Anes-
thesia Module. These data registries can receive data
directly from health IT, but several issues make sharing
data from local health IT difficult. First, a significant
investment of time and other resources is required to
map local clinical concepts to the registry data schema.
Another barrier to full harvesting of the information
contained within these datasets is the inconsistency
among the varieties of clinical taxonomies—a univer-
sally agreed-upon anesthesia “data dictionary” has yet
to appear. A third issue is the missing or inaccurate
data in health IT anesthesia documentation. This prob-
lem may be intractable without significant expense of
resources or technological advances, because clinicians
cannot be expected to be high-quality data-entry per-
sonnel while simultaneously administering anesthesia
and caring for patients. Finally, much of health IT data
is not discrete, structured, or categorized and rather is
represented in plain text; that is, natural/human lan-
guage. Until natural language processing (NLP, a field
of artificial intelligence in which computer software
understands human languages) matures, much of this
information cannot be used to great extent.
Despite such challenges, there is significant potential
for local and national registries with respect to qual-
ity improvement and health care research. These data
can help describe the current state of clinical care and
allow for benchmarking of process and outcome mea-
sures across multiple organizations, as well as sharing
of lessons learned. Pooled data can also be analyzed to
explore the relationships between specific patient care
factors and clinical outcomes, especially when these
outcomes are rare, although there are concerns that
such observational, large cohort studies have significant
shortcomings compared to traditional prospective ran-
domized controlled trials.10 But large datasets—often
called big data—have helped big business in other fields
visualize novel customer-product interrelationships and
devise new strategies. Perhaps, big data techniques will
be a cost- and time-effective way to augment prospec-
tive interventional studies and basic science research in
anesthesia. Some anticipated uses of big data include
modeling the risk of complications for perioperative
patients and sending such information back to the EHR
systems to inform clinical decision support (CDS) rules,
possibly predicting problems before they actually occur.
New computer techniques, such as machine learning or
cognitive inference computing, may be able to use big
data to draw conclusions from data in ways humans
cannot.␣
I
PROFESSIONAL PERFORMANCE DATA
REPORTING WITH HEALTH IT
Electronic reporting of professional quality is a specific
use of health IT data that is responsible for many report-
ing initiatives. The Physician Quality Reporting System
(PQRS) receives quality information from individual eli-
gible professionals and group practices for CMS. PQRS
quality measures are designed to help eligible profession-
als and group practices assess their performance across a
range of quality domains. In 2019, CMS plans to merge
several current quality and value-based assessment sys-
tems (including MU and PQRS) into either Merit-based
Incentive Payment Systems (MIPS) or advanced Alterna-
tive Payment Models (APMs) stemming from the recent
Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act of 2015
(MACRA).11
Quality measure reporting is recognized as a criti-
cal feature of an EHR. Some systems give the option of
recording quality documentation within the EHR itself.
Conversely, perhaps this reporting should be conducted
outside the EHR to reduce the risk of unwanted legal
discovery. An alternative to direct documentation is
membership in a CMS-approved qualified clinical data
registry that has an option for collection and submis-
sion of PQRS quality measures data on behalf of indi-
vidual providers. The AQI is currently designated as
both a Patient Safety Organization, which meets criteria
established in the Patient Safety Rule of the HHS and
a qualified clinical data registry. Qualified clinical data
registries and patient safety organizations have a high
level of medicolegal discovery protection to encourage
accurate reporting.12 Because MPOG is also a 2015 qual-
ified clinical data registry via its Anesthesiology Perfor-
mance Improvement and Reporting Exchange registry
(ASPIRE), NACOR and MPOG participants can leverage
their participation in these data registries to also satisfy
federal reporting requirements.␣
21 21
Section I INTRODUCTION
FEATURES OF THE ELECTRONIC
HEALTH RECORD IN ANESTHESIA AND
PERIOPERATIVE CARE
The EHR is a longitudinal electronic record of patient
health information generated by one or more encoun-
ters in any care delivery setting. Although there are
significant realized and potential advantages of using
EHRs for patients, providers, and the health care orga-
nization (Box 3.2), there are also many potential pit-
falls. Careful design may make the difference between
an effective EHR and a failed project. Because the fun-
damental purpose of the EHR is to support required
clinical and administrative activities, the EHR should be
intuitive and guide users as well as provide access to the
right information at the right time to meet the needs of
modern health care.
System feature requirements specific to AIMS include
the AARK core functions (permanent recording of device
data/device integration from hemodynamic monitors,
anesthesia machines, and other clinical devices), capture
of meta-data such as case events (e.g., in-the-room time;
cardiopulmonary bypass time), documentation of preop-
erative evaluation (including the use of structured data to
support reporting and CDS), management of perioperative
orders, and integration with the patient’s EHR and other
records in various health IT systems. Key targets for inte-
gration include the following:
1. Medication data (requiring integration with pharmacy
systems, which encompasses patient allergies, medica-
tion orders, administrations, interactions, formulary,
and costs)
2. Laboratory and radiology systems (study orders and
results, ability to record point-of-care test results)
3. Provider orders, notes, and consults
4. Nursing assessments including “ins and outs”
5. Billing functions (create charges to patient and their
insurance plan)
6. Patient tracking (integration with admission/discharge/
transfer application)
7. Perioperative management systems (e.g., case order-
ing, scheduling, utilization management)
For modular AIMS (components of a larger EHR), this
integration may be operationalized via shared databases
and routines (e.g., the AIMS module records medication
orders and administrations in the enterprise database
shared with the pharmacy and other clinical applications).
For standalone AIMS, multiple interfaces (hardware and
software) may be required to communicate data back and
forth between the AIMS and the other health IT systems
(described earlier) to avoid a perioperative information
“black hole.”
Perhaps the most important EHR feature is reliabil-
ity. The EHR must be fault tolerant, meaning resistant
to diverse challenges such as software “bugs,” hacking,
22
Box 3.2 Potential Benefits of Health Information
Technology (Health IT)
• It provides legible documentation.
• Information is accessible anywhere inside or outside
facility; accessible via mobile technology; accessible by
patients and providers.
• Data entry is traceable (an audit trail).
• It offers better completeness and accuracy of information.
• Information is current, and data repository has the same
information no matter how it is accessed.
• It decreases paperwork.
• It may improve care quality, reduce errors, improve coordi-
nation of care.
• It increases clinical efficiency, if constructed properly.
• It may eventually reduce overall health care costs.
• It facilitates research.
• It can facilitate teaching and learning.
• Automates many processes. Can apply rules and logic to
100% of documentation sessions. It never sleeps.
• It offers administrative efficiencies—including improving
charge capture.
• Can provide real-time alerts, prompts, notifications,
reminders.
• Patients can access their own health information.
• Health IT vendor is certified by CHPL and supports provider
and organization attestation for Meaningful Use.
CHPL, Certified health IT product list.
hardware failures, network errors, and even natural
disasters. Preparing for business continuity after a fail-
ure includes a fail-safe workflow (e.g., paper records with
scanning) and redundant data storage. Two common
models for protecting data are (1) data mirroring, in which
an application on a local workstation works with locally
stored data that are automatically copied to remote stor-
age (or a cloud), and (2) the client-server model in which
the local workstation (the client) works with data stored
on a remote computer (the server). An advantage of data
mirroring is that it may be resistant to brief network
interruptions. Client-server architectures can simplify
system management by centralizing software and data to
ease maintenance and backup activities. Box 3.3 shows
features that should be available in the EHR.␣
HEALTH CARE INFORMATION PRIVACY
AND SECURITY
Health care providers are morally and legally obligated
to protect the privacy of their patients as well as the
security of the EHR. The Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA) Privacy, Security, and Breach
Notification Rules are U.S. regulations that codify this
obligation into law.13 The Privacy Rule sets standards
for when and how protected health information (PHI),
may be used and disclosed in any medium, including
Chapter 3 Anesthesia and Health Information Technology
Box 3.3 Some Desired Features and Capabilities in Health
Box 3.4 Protected Health Information
Information Technology
• Electronic document management
• Scanned document management
• Orders capability (computerized physician order entry, CPOE)
• Physiologic device data importation into EHR
• Exchanging information with other hospital processes and
services: admission-discharge-transfer, scheduling, radiol-
ogy, pharmacy, respiratory therapy, laboratory, blood bank,
picture archiving and communication systems (PACS),
emergency services
• Integration or communication with rehabilitation and
long-term care facilities
• Staffing, concurrency checks
• Procedural documentation
• Templates that channel documentation, ensuring compli-
ance with local organizational, national professional, and
government guidelines, practice parameters, standards or
requirements.
• Clinical decision-support checklists, alerts, reminders,
emergency checklists and protocols
• “Scripting” or “macro” documentation allowing set-up and
multi-item documentation for repetitive situations
• Structured handoffs
• Medication management
• Administrative reporting
• Mobile integration
• Charge capture
• Telemedicine
• Facility and professional charge capture and compliance
checks and reports
• Patient communication and engagement (patient portals,
care instructions, pathway guides, others)
• Structured discrete data (flowsheets, lists, checkboxes,
buttons, etc.)
○ Categorized data, rather than free text
○ Facilitates reporting and data analysis
• Quality and outcomes analysis
○ Predictive modeling/analytics
○ Ability to export for data registries, population health
projects
○ Data warehouse
○ Patient satisfaction surveys: HCAHAPS, Press-Ganey,
others
○ Practice management reports
• Names
• Geographic subdivisions smaller than a state
• All elements of dates and the age of patients older than 89
years old
• Telephone and facsimile numbers, email or IP addresses,
URLs
• Social security numbers, medical record numbers, health
plan numbers, account numbers
• Device identifiers and serial numbers
• Biometric identifiers (e.g., fingerprints, voiceprints)
• Photographs of the face or other identifying objects, tat-
toos
• Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code
HCAHAPS, Hospital Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers
and Systems survey; CDS, clinical decision support.
electronic, written, and oral. PHI includes any data that
could be used to identify a patient, and when stored in
digital form is termed electronic PHI (ePHI) (Box 3.4). The
Security Rule requires certain precautions so that access
to health IT systems is limited to those with legitimate
purposes and proper authorization. The Breach Notifica-
tion Rule requires health care providers and organizations
to report any breach (a loss of patient privacy or failure
of health IT security) to HHS, patients, and, in some cases,
the media.
The HHS Office for Civil Rights is responsible for
administering and enforcing the HIPAA Security Rule.
The details are complex and are described in detail on
the HHS website.14 In addition to HIPAA, other appli-
cable federal, state, and local laws, as well as health
care organizations’ policies, may govern the protection
of ePHI. Some key HIPAA provisions include the provi-
sion of an official notice of privacy rights to all patients,
generally at “check-in” or on admission. Therefore, rou-
tine use of clinical data for anesthesia care generally
does not require additional consent. However, patient
authorization may be required for disclosure of PHI to
other entities. Patients have a right to their own medi-
cal record as well as to limit access to their PHI. There
are also laws that restrict changing information in the
electronic record for fraudulent purposes. Modern EHRs
should have extensive audit trails and integrity checks
to detect alterations.
Data security is an evolving field, and as new system
capabilities offer increased features, new vulnerabilities
also emerge. HHS has raised the alarm about a recent
increase in ePHI privacy breaches, detailed in a document
on privacy and the security of ePHI produced by ONC.15
Institutions and individual providers share responsibility
in breach prevention. The security of health IT is a sig-
nificant concern; for example, unknown hospital system
hackers have held EHR data for ransom. Recommended
ePHI privacy and security practices for individuals are
summarized in Box 3.5.
At the health care organizational level, the security
officer must perform a risk analysis, develop a risk miti-
gation plan, and approve electronic systems, such as an
EHR. Purchasers of health IT must conduct security risk
analyses upon installation or upgrade. The health care
organization may also benefit from the work of the Health
Information Trust Alliance (HITRUST), a U.S. organiza-
tion that, in collaboration with health care, technology,
and information security leaders, has established a Com-
mon Security Framework. This includes a prescriptive set
23 23
I
IP, Internet protocol; URLs, uniform resource locators.
Section I INTRODUCTION
of controls that seek to harmonize the requirements of
multiple regulations and standards and can be employed
by organizations that create, access, store, or exchange
sensitive and regulated data. MU Stage 3 includes provi-
sions that the Food and Drug Administration will deliver
new tools to help mobile health product developers man-
age health care data security. See Table 3.1 for the three
main U.S. agencies involved in health IT oversight.␣
SELECTED KEY TOPICS FOR HEALTH IT
Interoperability
Health care data collection and management systems
often consist of a core application (computer program)
and separate modular applications or data sources (within
the organization and outside the organization) that extend
functionality. Some organizations take a predominantly
modular approach and have many separate applications
from multiple vendors in order to meet their complete
health IT needs (e.g., the laboratory system, the orders
system). When functions are largely centralized within
the same general application, an organization may be said
to have an enterprise system. The ability to communicate
among the various modules and with outside applications
and data sources is referred to as interoperability. With
Box 3.5 Recommended Privacy and Security Practices for
EHR Users
high-level interoperability, organizations can share data
even when using different types or versions of health
IT.16,17 Interoperability can be operationalized at different
levels: software applications (1) may share information
with built-in functionality, (2) may share data from appli-
cation to application using standardized formats (e.g.,
HL7) or application programming interfaces (APIs), or (3)
may interface remotely via health information exchanges
(HIEs), which are large data stores that aggregate data
from various health care organizations. Interoperability
replaces inefficient paper workflows and reduces duplica-
tive testing and medication mistakes. Interoperability also
fosters better preventive care and chronic disease man-
agement, as well as improving provider communication.
In order to meet MU rules, modular software applica-
tions must be able to exchange and use electronic health
information without special effort on the part of the user.
The ONC has devised an “interoperability road map” to
guide current and future development of a learning health
system.18 Interoperability also includes multiple device
integration in which data from physiologic monitors,
anesthesia machines, ventilators, intravenous pumps,
medication dispensers, and other electronic devices
are automatically captured by the EHR. The Internet of
Things (IOT) is the broader trend in interoperability, in
which many electronic devices (from home appliances, to
vehicles, to personal health devices) are becoming inter-
connected, with resultant rapid growth in functionality
(as well as increased security risks). Although interoper-
ability is a challenging and resource-intensive process, it
is a key promising feature of future health IT.␣
• Do not share passwords under any circumstances.
• Use a “strong” password (minimum of six characters, mix
in uppercase, numbers, and symbols) on all computing
devices including smartphones.
• Log out of computer systems when not in use.
• Destroy all papers containing PHI in a shredder or locked
disposal bin.
• Do not leave PHI in any form lying around (better yet,
avoid printing PHI).
• Do not send PHI over an unsecured email system, in social
media, or leave messages with PHI on voicemail.
System Design, User Interface, and Usability
The innumerable pieces of medical data in an EHR include
laboratory test and imaging results, demographic infor-
mation, billing and compliance data, scheduling, materi-
als management, pharmacy data, physiologic data, and
provider clinical documentation. Clinical assessment of
patients might require users to find information on mul-
tiple screens, at different levels within the same applica-
tion, or among several applications. A “hunt and peck”
EHR, Electronic health record; PHI, protected health information.
Table 3.1 Overview of Health Human Service Entities Applicable to EHR Oversight
Federal Office/Agency Website Health IT-Related Responsibilities
Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services (CMS)
www.cms.gov Oversees Meaningful Use Program
Office for Civil Rights (OCR) Office of the National Coordinator for
Health Information Technology
www.hhs.gov/ocr www.HealthIT.gov
www.healthit.gov/playbook
Responsible for and enforces HIPAA Privacy, Security,
and Breach Notification Rules
Support for the adoption and promotion of EHRs and
Health Information Exchange (HIE)
EHRs, Electronic health records; HHS, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; HIPAA, Health Insurance Portability & Accountability Act of
1996.
24
Chapter 3 Anesthesia and Health Information Technology
approach, or presentation of data on screens in a way that
impedes global comprehension, produces an enormous
memory and cognitive burden on users and does not
take into account human factors. In addition to reduc-
ing efficiency, poor user interface and data visualization
design may impede efficient pattern recognition, clinical
assessment, and accurate documentation. More broadly,
poor user interface and system design can prevent cli-
nicians from not only understanding what is happening
to a patient but also being able to integrate information
and predict and prepare for future events, a phenome-
non termed situational awareness. Situational awareness
was initially described in the field of aviation but has
been applied to anesthesia. It is defined as the collec-
tive functioning of teams and applies to complex systems
involving groups of clinicians and computer systems in
perioperative care.19
In computer science and informatics, the user interface
denotes all features of an information device with which
a user may interact, including when and how the sys-
tem invites interaction and how it responds to it. A good
health IT user interface allows clinicians to quickly com-
prehend and process large amounts of information safely
and efficiently. The user interface may be constrained
by the overall design of the health IT system. Therefore,
overall system design must be informed by the principles
of computer-human interaction. Human factors engineer-
ing is the practice of considering the real-world needs
and abilities of the technology user—expecting humans
to act as humans—that is, to make mistakes as part of
their normal interaction with the technology, and to have
resource-constrained cognitive abilities and memory. One
technique for improving human-computer system perfor-
mance is user-centered design—an iterative technology
development workflow—in which cycles of design and
prototype development are informed by early user-based
evaluation, such as simulation and evaluation of user
interfaces during development. Although such iterative
engineering practices may have larger up-front costs,
there may be significant savings as technologies that are
more acceptable to users are rolled out and expensive “re-
dos” are avoided.
Design principles from industries other than computer
science and aviation can also be successfully adapted to
health IT. The industrial safety concept of a hierarchy of
controls has been applied to health care and anesthesia
IT, in which levels of intervention to defeat a hazard are
described in order of most to least effective.20 The most
effective controls are those that simply eliminate a risk,
that is, make it impossible for the bad outcome to occur.
An example is a hard stop rule that does not permit
ordering a medication with a lethal dose. The next level
of intervention is substitution, in which a less hazard-
ous process is substituted for the hazardous one, such as
replacing anesthesia-drawn up medications with prefilled
syringes with standardized concentrations, or in health
IT, replacing free text with specific check boxes or but-
tons. Engineering the controls refers to making it easier
to avoid a hazard through system design. For example,
the risk of a COWPIE (charting on wrong patient in EHR)
can be reduced by including patient identification pho-
tographs in the EHR on various crucial screens or by
requiring bar code scanning of identification bracelets for
critical activites like blood product transfusion. The next
level of danger avoidance is built on adminstrative or
organizational practices and education, such as check-
lists prior to procedures (which can be built into AIMS
workflows). The least effective level of control is at the
individual level, such as training workers to always click
on a link to check allergies prior to starting a case. When-
ever possible, AIMS engineers and governance members
should try to prevent hazards (e.g., patient safety, com-
pliance issues, billing problems) at higher levels of con-
trol, and work with clinical and institutional leadership to
eliminate, replace, or engineer them away.21
Usability is the extent to which a technology helps
users achieve their goals in a satisfying, effective, and
efficient manner within the constraints and complexities
of their work environment. The American Medical Infor-
matics Association (AMIA) has recommended usability
principles in building EHRs. Several of these principles
are particularly applicable to technology rolled out in
the perioperative environment: minimalism (the ability
to access core function quickly), reversibility (function-
ality to undo simple user errors), and memory (memory
load reduction, to reduce the cognitive burden of oper-
ating the system, preserving memory capacity for core
tasks).
The AMIA recommendation of flexibility highlights
the usefulness of system customization. It is clear that
usability may be increased by customizing the interface
according to user preferences and roles. However, there
are also benefits to standardizing user interfaces and
system behaviors according to local and national norms,
such that health IT developers must carefully balance the
benefits of customization versus those of standardization.
Although there is no single accepted evaluation tool for
assessing usability of health IT, standardized question-
naires, simulation, and screen and video recording have
been employed to evaluate user satisfaction, charting
accuracy, situational awareness (effectiveness), and the
number of “clicks” to complete a task (efficiency) in an
old versus a new AIMS. Such testing should be performed
both prior to implementation, and periodically after roll-
out with the goals of assessing and directing improve-
ments in human interaction with the hardware, software,
and human workflows that compose the total system.
An important corollary to usability concerns the resil-
iency of the users. When faced with low-usability, but
mandated-to-be-used health IT systems, health care pro-
fessionals will generally find a way to accomplish their
goals, in spite of the system limitations. In such cases,
25 25
I
Section I INTRODUCTION
although the health IT system may appear to be work-
ing successfully, the demands on the user’s memory and
attention (such as relying on system “work-arounds” or
having their “face buried in the computer screen”) may
result in not only operating less efficiently but also in
decreased situational awareness, clinical performance,
and user satisfaction.22
␣
Clinical Decision Support
CDS is an important feature of effective modern health IT
and one of the most touted reasons for organizations to
purchase health IT:
Clinical decision support provides clinicians, staff, patients, or
other individuals with knowledge and person-specific informa-
tion, intelligently filtered or presented at appropriate times, to
enhance health and health care. CDS encompasses a variety of
tools to enhance decision-making in the clinical workflow. These
tools include computerized alerts and reminders to healthcare
providers and patients; clinical guidelines; condition-specific or-
der sets; focused patient data reports and summaries; documen-
tation templates; diagnostic support; and contextually relevant
reference information, among other tools.8
CDS may be passive, in which the system, by present-
ing the clinician with the right information at the right
time, assists with decision making. Passive CDS includes
the display of relevant laboratory results or vital signs,
or providing quick access to appropriate checklists, pro-
tocols, standards, or policies and is tightly linked with
user interface design. Passive CDS supports the basic lev-
els of situational awareness: knowing what is happening
now to one’s patient. Active CDS uses logic (i.e., rules)
to detect particular clinical scenarios and then execute
actions, such as generating a warning, alert, or automated
action. For example, an EHR can automatically monitor
a patient’s vital signs and laboratory results, and, when a
significant anomaly is detected, such as signs of systemic
inflammatory response syndrome, it generates a pop-up
alert, sends a pager/smartphone alert, lights up a moni-
toring “dashboard,” or suggests laboratory or medication
orders. Active CDS can address failures of higher levels
of situational awareness; that is, failure to integrate and
analyze data from various sources to interpret a clinical
situation. CDS may be implemented at the user level or
may operate at a multipatient level, in real time, or over a
longer period of time (e.g., an operating room efficiency
dashboard).
CDS has many potential and realized benefits in man-
agerial workflows, in process of care, and ultimately in
care outcomes. In anesthesia, CDS has improved cardiac
workup protocol adherence, warned of anticoagula-
tion status before a regional block, sent near real-time
reminders and notifications for intraoperative and criti-
cal care, and reduced some adverse outcomes, such as
postoperative nausea and vomiting.23,24 One significant
limitation of CDS is that it cannot utilize information
that is not accessible, such as medical history informa-
tion from another, nonintegrated health system, nor data
that have yet to be recorded in the EHR. What good is a
drug-drug interaction alert that fails to appear because it
does not know the patient’s home medications or signals
after the concerning medication has already been given?
Automation-induced complacency describes the situation
in which clinicians become overly dependent on alerts
or other CDS and then fail to recognize and act on that
same situation when CDS fails to warn them. Ensuring
adequate EHR data and structure so that CDS is not a
black box—that is, so that the provider understands how
the CDS works and on what data it depends—may reduce
these errors.
A 2016 National Patient Safety Goal to reduce unhelp-
ful alerts and alarms addresses the inverse situation, in
which too many or nonhelpful CDS warnings cause con-
fusion and degradation of clinician performance through
the phenomenon of alert fatigue. Given the consequences
of alerts that fail to signal or warn inappropriately, CDS,
especially active CDS, should be evaluated similarly to
hemodynamic alarms or laboratory tests. They have mea-
surable sensitivity and specificity, and in practice, cou-
pled with the incidence of the issue to be detected, also
have positive and negative predictive values; that is, what
is the probability that the presence (or absence) of a CDS
alert reflects the presence (or absence) of a true signifi-
cant situation. To determine the impact of an active CDS
intervention, health IT management should test it “in the
background” and determine the warning characteristics,
and once it has been rolled out, should measure the effect
that the CDS tool has on health care provider behavior,
such as ordering a new test or medication. One common
sense recommendation is to avoid hard stops as much
as possible, which can have the unintended consequence
of completely stopping the ability of a user to perform
productive work, a situation made exponentially worse
when flawed design makes it impossible to satisfy the rule
that led to the hard stop (a significant drawback for user
satisfaction and effectiveness). If hard stops must be used
for critical patient safety reasons, then it may be best to
first test the rule as a caution or soft stop, observe for
appropriate behavior, and, only when validated, turn on
hard stop functionality.␣
Transitioning to Health IT: From Paper Records
to an AIMS, and Beyond
When transitioning from a traditional paper workflow,
or when migrating to a new health IT system, decisions
should be guided by such principles as usability, adding
value to clinical work, supporting features such as CDS
and reporting, and mitigating risks. These risks should
not be underestimated, and an assessment of any IT sys-
tem should include careful analysis and ongoing moni-
toring of untoward side effects (Box 3.6).
26
Chapter 3 Anesthesia and Health Information Technology
Box 3.6 Possible Risks or Hazards of Health Information
Technology
Box 3.7 Key Health Information Technology (IT) Issues
to Investigate Prior to Selection or Implementation of an
AIMS or Other Large Scale Health IT
• Technology may paradoxically reduce direct communica-
tion between providers.
• IT can create more or new documentation work for clini-
cians.
• Information overload for clinicians may lead to cognitive
errors.
• Traditional workflow may be significantly changed and
fragmented by health IT.
• Documentation on wrong patient may be easier.
• E-work may cause provider distraction away from clinical
work or from patient interaction.
• Copy-paste overuse may cause out-of-date information
and bloated notes.
• Negative attitudes may be generated toward health IT.
• Loss or corruption of patient data can occur.
• Generation of new types of errors may be due to unantici-
pated system function and any disruption in traditional
workflow or information transfer.
• Excessive costs include initial cost of system, ongoing
costs for hardware and software licenses, network costs
support, licenses and updates, facility IT support, and
further development.
• A “hold harmless” clause in health IT vendor contracts
may leave organizations liable for health IT-related clinical
problems.
• There may be a persistence of paper workarounds.
• Overdependence on health IT can lead to automation
complacency.
• Hidden dependencies cause unwanted, unanticipated
changes in status of orders, patient electronic location.
• Alert fatigue, poor clinical correlation or specificity for
medication or other alerts are potential problems.
• Poor user interface and usability can lead to errors and low
user satisfaction.
• Will your health IT vendor(s) relationship be collaborative?
• What are reasonable estimates of cost over time? Closely
examine financial agreements with software vendor, for
acquisition, maintenance, and upgrades.
• Investigate requirements for and involvement with depart-
mental level IT personnel, as well as need for clinician IT
position supported by department and hospital. Very sig-
nificant clinician time is required for planning and ongoing
maintenance of all health IT software.
• Consider data, network and application dependability: mini-
mizing software or hardware downtime, strategy for local
and remote data back-ups, power reliability and back-up
supply, data storage structure and physical location.
• Review remote access via network: Access via Internet?
Access via mobile devices? Are users allowed to bring their
own devices?
• Investigate access to applications: facility workstation
numbers and locations, and ergonomics.
• Establish IT support: staffing, 24/7/365 support, on-site
vs. remote support? Identify problem resolution response
time for critical care areas such as operating room and
critical care.
• Determine user sign-on and access (AKA: logon or
authentication) system: Is access security defined at the
user, role, department, or service level? If there are several
standalone applications, is there a single sign-on (SSO)
process? Is there an audit trail?
• How well do different components of local health IT
integrate (interoperate) together? What are the inevitable
limitations?
• Consider reporting capabilities, including provider gener-
ated, departmental management reports, health care sys-
tem reports, and local, regional, professional, and national
reporting requirements (including Meaningful Use).
• Determine how prior workflows must change. Can the
software be modified to support existing workflows?
Should some workflows change, or should such customi-
zation be avoided to support standardization?
• HIM (health information management) involvement for
documentation policies
Health IT, Health information technology.
Anesthesia and perioperative leaders have a central role
to play in acquiring new AIMS or perioperative informa-
tion management systems. They should be leaders in the
consideration of new anesthesia and perioperative health
IT and should work directly with potential vendors and
application developers. Even if their health care organiza-
tion is purchasing an enterprise-wide EHR, they still have
the important role of sharing their evaluation of the AIMS
and perioperative modules, and evaluating which compo-
nents are acceptable (or not). Box 3.7 shows some issues
to investigate during the selection and implementation of
health IT, such as an AIMS. A basic checklist for large-scale
health IT projects is shown in Box 3.8. Selected desirable
features of perioperative health care technology are sum-
marized in Box 3.9. Note the role of change management,
the intersection of the new technology with the organi-
zation’s culture, project communication, and implementa-
tion plan. Crucial “people factors” needed for a successful
rollout include strongly committed leadership, a project
AIMS, Anesthesia information management systems.
champion with strong political and social skills, and early
and frequent inclusion of end users in the project, from
the initial design process to final evaluation. Users may
be more drawn to a new system by their perception of the
utility of the system—what can it do?—rather than by their
perception of ease of use. But both are important, so project
education not only should include how to use the system,
but should demonstrate how the new tool can improve
clinical care or the user’s effectiveness and efficiency.25
When initiating a new AIMS or related health IT, remem-
ber that the primary goal of these systems is to improve the
quality of the health of individual patients. Fundamental to
27 27
I
Section I INTRODUCTION
Box 3.8 Basic Checklist for Health Information
Technology Projects
Implementation Project Planning
• Allocation of resources
• Equipment
• Time
• Money
• Personnel
• Leadership
• IT-Clinician partnership
• Roles and accountability
• Goals
• Feature and gap analysis
• Timelines
• Milestones
• Change request management
• In-scope vs. out-of-scope decisions
• Vendor support
• Approach to workflow assessment and change
• Interprovider communication assessment
• Organizational culture
• Pilot rollout vs. test and general rollout
• For enterprise systems: staged application rollout vs.
"big-bang" implementation␣
Prerollout training and testing
• Shadow charting
• Usability assessment
• Use of simulation
• Mandatory training
• Initial and continuing education for providers
• "Super-users" and provider project "champions"
• Failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA)
Box 3.9 Selected Desired Features in Perioperative Health
Information Technology
• Support for preoperative clinic and perioperative surgical
home
• Includes ambulatory and inpatient OR cases, OB, NORA (non-
OR anesthesia), acute and chronic pain care, critical care
• Robust perioperative managerial, clinical workflow, and
financial reports
• Perioperative management:
• Status boards (“flight board”) tracking of planned and
in-progress patient flow for perioperative areas
• Scheduling of patients, cases, and locations
• Personnel assignments
• Equipment and supply management
NORA, Non–operating room anesthesia; OB, obstetrics; OR, operating
room.
this is that it support the quality, managerial, and financial
“health” of the organization. However, when, in the inter-
est of supporting these secondary goals, the burden of data
entry becomes excessive, system usability and provider
satisfaction will likely suffer. A recent American College
of Physicians position paper highlights these tensions: “As
28
value-based care and accountable care models grow, the
primary purpose of the EHR should remain the facilitation
of seamless patient care to improve outcomes while con-
tributing to data collection that supports necessary analy-
ses.”26 Although numerous stakeholders may wish to have
additional data recorded in the medical record, it is the
role of health IT governance and clinical leaders to priori-
tize these tasks according to institutional priorities. They
must also advocate for overall usability, such that the act
of using the new technology itself improves and does not
degrade patient care.␣
Legal Issues and Responsibilities of the
AIMS User
Several cases in the literature have described the risks,
such as legal liabilities, of using AIMS with design flaws
or inadequate training or user practices. One of the most
common apprehensions about AIMS concerns device
integration, when transitioning from paper records to
an AIMS. Providers have been concerned that the now-
visible greater variation in autodocumented vital signs, and
the inevitable data artifacts, will somehow present medico-
legal risks. Although inaccurate autodocumentation, arti-
facts, and unnoticed data dropouts do present some risks,
there is no historical evidence of significant medicolegal
negative consequences to providers in general from the
proper use of an AIMS.27,28 In fact, the automatic record-
ing of physiologic data may be welcomed by the specialty
of anesthesia, because it removes the known problems of
human filtering of data and improves the credibility of the
record. Nonetheless, EHR users must understand the basic
workflow of device data acquisition and be able to detect
and correct failure of data capture. EHRs should also per-
mit easy notation of artifact or data collection errors.
A case report of a patient undergoing a craniotomy
illustrates these concerns.29 According to legal records,
upon returning from a break, the responsible anesthesia
provider found that the device data/vital sign data stream
had failed, without being noticed by the interim anes-
thesia provider who had covered the patient during the
break. As a result, 93 minutes of data were not entered
in the chart. The patient had postoperative quadriplegia,
and the missing anesthetic documentation may have con-
tributed to settling the case. The anesthesiologist did not
recognize the interpretation of data transmission because
the “active” window obscured the graphic display of data.
This case emphasizes that monitoring devices occasion-
ally fail and the need for the anesthesia provider to be
vigilant.
Although improvements in AIMS design since this
case include using CDS to display an alert when data
flow is interrupted, ultimately, it is the responsibility
of the health IT user to follow institutional, local, and
national standards to create a complete and accurate
anesthetic and medical record. Users may even need to
Chapter 3 Anesthesia and Health Information Technology
periodically manually enter missing data or flag data
gaps and artifacts according to the institutional policy.
Such workflows also apply in cases of system or net-
work downtime. When there are data issues, it is best to
document fully and transparently what transpired, and
to correct the record as soon as possible. Audit trails
are discoverable and record the source of data and the
time they were modified. Obviously, very late changes
to an anesthetic record could have the appearance of
impropriety.␣
its use as it applies to perioperative and critical care. The
use of health IT is essential to the concept of a periopera-
tive surgical home (PSH) (Box 3.9, and Chapter 51).
Acquisition and use of data will drive future
changes in every organization. It is said that you can’t
manage what you can’t measure. Once a large number
of organizations contribute data about their patients
into aggregated data pools, health IT may transform
and improve patient care in ways far beyond current
achievements.␣
CONCLUSION AND THE FUTURE
QUESTIONS OF THE DAY
Health IT is ubiquitous and inevitable, and evidence indi-
cates that health IT does have real benefits,30 but the
design and details are crucial. Health IT should support
both the clinical needs of providers and patients, as well
as the financial and management needs of the organiza-
tion. All anesthesia providers must understand how health
IT impacts patient care. Anesthesia providers must be
involved in IT decision making and development to ensure
that current and future systems support the specific needs
of perioperative care. Indeed, anesthesia trainees also have
a role in advancing health IT, recognizing that IT systems
can be useful for education and learning.31,32 Health IT is
still evolving rapidly and it is critical to monitor and study
1. What are the potential advantages of the electronic
health record (EHR)?
2. What type of information is considered protected
health information (PHI)?
3. What are the recommended information privacy and
security practices for the anesthesia provider using an
EHR?
4. Describe some examples of passive and active clinical
decision support (CDS) in health care. What are the
potential benefits and hazards of CDS?
5. What factors promote success in the transition from
paper records to an electronic anesthesia information
management system (AIMS)?
REFERENCES
1. Stol IS, Ehrenfeld JM, Epstein RH.
Technology diffusion of anesthesia in-
formation management systems into
academic anesthesia departments in the
United States. Anesth Analg. 2014;118(3):
644–650.
2. Molnar C, Nemes C, Szabo S, Fulesdi B.
Harvey Cushing, a pioneer of neuroan-
esthesia. J Anesth. 2008;22(4):483–
486.
3. Shah NJ, Tremper KK, Kheterpal S.
Anatomy of an anesthesia information
management system. Anesthesiol Clin.
2011;29(3):355–365.
4. Stabile M, Cooper L. Review article: the
evolving role of information technol-
ogy in perioperative patient safety. Can
J Anaesth. 2013;60(2):119–126.
5. Directors ABO. APSF endorses use
of automated record keepers. An-
esth Pat Safety Found Newsletter.
2001;16(4).
6. Galvez JA, Rothman BS, Doyle CA,
et al. A narrative review of meaning-
ful use and anesthesia information
management systems. Anesth Analg.
2015;121(3):693–706.
7. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services. EHR Incentive Programs.
https://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-
Guidance/Legislation/EHRIncentiveProgr
ams/index.html; 2016 Accessed 5/1/2016.
8. Office of the National Coordinator for
Health Information Technology. Health
IT.gov. Office of the National Coordi-
nator for Health Information Technol-
ogy. http://www.healthit.gov/; 2015 Ac-
cessed 5/1/2016.
9. Kheterpal S. In the land of the blind, the
one-eyed man is king. Anesthesiology.
2014;120(3):523–525.
10. Vetter TR, Redden DT. The power and
perils of big data: it all depends on how
you slice, dice, and digest it. Anesth
Analg. 2015;121(3):582–585.
11. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid
Services (CMS). PQRS Measures. ht
tps://www.cms.gov/medicare/qual
ity-initiatives-patient-assessment-
instruments/pqrs/measurescodes.html;
2016 Accessed 8/24/2016.
12. Dutton RP. Making a difference: the
Anesthesia Quality Institute. Anesth
Analg. 2015;120(3):507–509.
13. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
(CMS). HIPAA Basics for providers: priva-
cy, security, and breach notification rules.
http://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-profession
als/index.html; 2016 Accessed 5/1/2016.
14. U.S. Department of Health & Human
Services (HHS). Health Information
Privacy. www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-
professionals/security/laws-regula-
tions/; 2016 Accessed 5/1/2016.
15. ONC. Guide to Privacy and Security of
Electronic Health Information V2.0.
Office of the National Coordinator for
Health Information Technology; 2015.
16. HIMSS. What Is Interoperability?. http://
www.himss.org/library/interoperability-
standards/what-is-interoperability; www.
healthit.gov/isa/; 2016 Accessed 5/1/2016.
17. Sittig DF, Wright A. What makes an EHR
“open” or interoperable? J Am Med In-
form Assoc. 2015;22(5):1099–1101.
18. Office of the National Coordinator
for Health Information Technology
(ONC). Connecting Health and Care
for the Nation. A Shared Nationwide
Interoperability Roadmap; 2015. www.
healthit.gov/sites/default/files/hie-
interoperability/nationwide-interoper-
ability-roadmap-final-version-1.0.pdf.
19. Schulz CM, Endsley MR, Kochs EF,
et al. Situation awareness in anesthe-
sia: concept and research. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 2013;118(3):729–742.
20. Nolan T. System changes to improve
patient safety. BMJ. 2000;320:771–773.
21. Braun BRA, Donofrio K, Hafiz H, Loeb J.
The Joint Commission—Improving Pa-
tient and Worker Safety: opportunities
for Synergy, Collaboration and Innova-
tion; 11/19/2012. http://www.jointcom
mission.org/improving_patient_worker
_safety/. Accessed 5/1/2016.
29 29
I
Section I INTRODUCTION
22. Karsh BT, Weinger MB, Abbott PA,
Wears RL. Health information technol-
ogy: fallacies and sober realities. J Am
Med Inform Assoc. 2010;17(6):617–623.
23. Epstein RH, Dexter F, Patel N. Influenc-
ing anesthesia provider behavior using
anesthesia information management
system data for near real-time alerts
and post hoc reports. Anesth Analg.
2015;12(3):678–692.
24. Nair BG, Horibe M, Newman SF, et al.
Anesthesia information management
system-based near real-time decision
support to manage intraoperative hy-
potension and hypertension. Anesth
Analg. 2014;118(1):206–214.
25. Vigoda MM, Rothman B, Green JA.
Shortcomings and challenges of infor-
mation system adoption. Anesthesiol
Clin. 2011;29(3):397–412.
26. Kuhn T, Basch P, Barr M, Yackel T.
Clinical documentation in the 21st cen-
tury: executive summary of a policy
position paper from the American Col-
lege of Physicians. Ann Intern Med.
2015;162(4):301–303.
27. Vigoda MM, Rembold SD. Implications
of electronic discovery. ASA Monitor.
2011;75:20-21.
28. Mangalmurti SS, Murtagh L, Mello MM.
Medical malpractice liability in the age
of electronic health records. N Engl J
Med. 2010;363(21):2060–2067.
29. Vigoda MM, Lubarsky DA. Failure to
recognize loss of incoming data in an
anesthesia record-keeping system may
have increased medical liability. Anesth
Analg. 2006;102(6):1798–1802.
30. Furukawa MF, Eldridge N, Wang Y,
et al. Electronic health record adoption
and rates of in-hospital adverse events.
J Patient Saf. Epub. 2016 Feb 6.
31. Xie J. Up to speed: a role for trainees
in advancing health information tech-
nology. Pediatrics. 2015;136(3):412–
414.
32. Ehrenfeld JM, McEvoy MD, Furman
WR, et al. Automated near-real-time
clinical performance feedback for an-
esthesiology residents: one piece of
the milestones puzzle. Anesthesiology.
2014;120(1):172–184.
30
Chapter
4 BASIC PHARMACOLOGIC
PRINCIPLES
Tae Kyun Kim, Shinju Obara, and Ken B. Johnson
PHARMACOKINETIC PRINCIPLES
Fundamental Pharmacokinetic Concepts
PHARMACODYNAMIC PRINCIPLES
Potency and Efficacy
Anesthetic Drug Interactions
SPECIAL POPULATIONS
Influence of Obesity on Anesthetic Drugs
Influence of Increasing Age on Anesthetic
Drug Pharmacology
SUMMARY
QUESTIONS OF THE DAY
The basic principles of pharmacology are a fundamen-
tal element of an anesthesia provider’s knowledge base.
This chapter provides an overview of key principles in
clinical pharmacology used to describe anesthetic drug
behavior. Box 4.1 lists definitions of some basic pharma-
cologic terms. Pharmacokinetic concepts include volumes
of distribution, drug clearance, transfer of drugs between
plasma and tissues, and binding of drugs to circulat-
ing plasma proteins. The section on pharmacokinetics
introduces both the physiologic processes that determine
pharmacokinetics and the mathematical models used to
relate dose to concentration. Anesthesia providers rarely
administer just one drug. Most anesthetics are a combi-
nation of several drugs with specific goals in analgesia,
sedation, and muscle relaxation. Thus, pharmacodynamic
interactions can profoundly influence anesthetic effect.
Formulating the right dose of an anesthetic requires con-
sideration of many patient factors: age; body habitus; sex;
chronic exposure to opioids, benzodiazepines, or alcohol;
presence of heart, lung, kidney, or liver disease; and the
extent of blood loss or dehydration, among others. Two
of these factors, body habitus and age, will be discussed
as examples of patient factors influencing anesthetic drug
pharmacology.
PHARMACOKINETIC PRINCIPLES
Pharmacokinetics describes the relationship between
drug dose and drug concentration in plasma or at the
site of drug effect over time. The processes of absorp-
tion, distribution, and elimination (metabolism and
excretion) govern this relationship. Absorption is not rel-
evant to intravenously administered drugs but is relevant
to all other routes of drug delivery. The time course of
The editors and publisher would like to thank Dr. Steven L. Sha-
fer for contributing to this chapter in the previous edition of this
work. It has served as the foundation for the current chapter.
33
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Box 4.1 Definitions of Basic Pharmacologic Terms
Pharmacokinetics: the relationship between drug dose
and drug concentration at the site of drug action
Biophase: the time delay between changes in plasma con-
centration and drug effect
Effect-site concentration: a mathematically derived vir-
tual location where an anesthetic drug exerts its effect
Front-end kinetics: a description of intravenous drug
behavior immediately following administration
Back-end kinetics: a description of intravenous drug
behavior when administered as continuous infusion, includ-
ing the time period after termination of infusion
Context-sensitive half-time: a description of the time
required for drug concentration to decrease by 50% after
termination of drug infusion, based on duration of infusion
(context)
Pharmacodynamics: a description of what the drug does to
the body including the relationship between drug concentra-
tion and pharmacologic effect
Dynamic range: the drug concentration range in which
changes in drug effect occur. Drug levels below the dynamic
range are ineffective; levels above the dynamic range do not
provide additional effect.
intravenously administered drugs is a function of distri-
bution volume and clearance. Estimates of distribution
volumes and clearances are described by pharmacokinetic
parameters. Pharmacokinetic parameters are derived from
mathematical formulas fit to measured blood or plasma
concentrations over time following a known drug dose.
Fundamental Pharmacokinetic Concepts
Volume of Distribution
An oversimplified model of drug distribution through-
out plasma and tissues is the dilution of a drug dose
into a tank of water. The volume of distribution (Vd) is
the apparent size of the tank required to explain a mea-
sured drug concentration from the tank water once the
drug has had enough time to thoroughly mix within
the tank (Fig. 4.1). The distribution volume is estimated
using the simple relationship between dose (e.g., mg)
and measured concentration (e.g., mg/L) as presented
in Eq. 1.
Eq. 1
Amount of dose (mg)
Volume of distribution=
Concentration (mg/L)
With an estimate of tank volume, drug concentration
after any bolus dose can be calculated. Just as the tank
has a volume regardless of whether there is drug in it,
distribution volumes in people are an intrinsic property
regardless of whether any drug has been given.
Human bodies are not water tanks. As soon as a drug is
injected, it begins to be cleared from the body. To account
34
Dose = 10 mg
Blood or plasma
Concentration = 10 mg/L
Volume of distribution = 10 mg/(10 mg/L) = 1 L
Fig. 4.1 Schematic of a single-tank model of distribution vol-
ume. The group of red dots at the top left represent a bolus dose
that, when administered to the tank of water, evenly distribute
within the tank. (Modified from Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson
LI, et al, eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders
Elsevier; 2014:Fig. 24.1.)
for this in the schematic presented in Fig. 4.1, a faucet
is added to the tank to mimic drug elimination from the
body (Fig. 4.2). Using Eq. 1, estimating the volume of
distribution without accounting for elimination leads to
volume of distribution estimates that become larger than
initial volume. To refine the definition of distribution
volume, the amount of drug that is present at a given
time t is divided by the concentrations at the same time.
Eq. 2
Amount (t)
Vd=
Concentration (t)
If elimination occurs as a first-order process (i.e., elimina-
tion is proportional to the concentration at that time), the
volume of distribution calculated by Eq. 2 will be con-
stant (Figs. 4.2 and 4.3).
When a drug is administered intravenously, some drug
stays in the vascular volume, but most of the drug dis-
tributes to peripheral tissues. This distribution is often
represented as additional volumes of distribution (tanks)
connected to a central tank (blood or plasma volume).
Peripheral distribution volumes increase the total volume
of distribution (Fig. 4.4).
The schematic in Fig. 4.4 presents a plasma volume
and tissue volume. The peripheral tank represents distri-
bution of drug in peripheral tissues. There may be more
than one peripheral tank (volume) to best describe the
entire drug disposition in the body. The size of the periph-
eral volumes represents a drug’s solubility in tissue rela-
tive to blood or plasma. The more soluble a drug is in
peripheral tissue relative to blood or plasma, the larger
the peripheral volumes of distribution.
Chapter 4 Basic Pharmacologic Principles
Dose = 10 mg
Dose = 10 mg
Time = 2 min
Time = 4 min
Tank volume = 1 L
Blood or plasma Blood or plasma
Concentration = 5 mg/L
Concentration = 2.5 mg/L
Volume of distribution = 5 mg/(5 mg/L) = 1 L
Volume of distribution = 2.5 mg/(2.5 mg/L) = 1 L
Fig. 4.2 Schematic of a single-tank model of elimination as a first-order process. At 2 minutes (left panel)
and 4 minutes (right panel) following a 10-mg drug bolus, tank concentrations are decreasing from 5 to
2.5 mg/mL. Accounting for elimination, estimates of the distribution volume at each time point are both
1 L. (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al, eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders
Elsevier; 2014:Fig. 24.2.)
Drug concentration (mg/mL)
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Volume of distribution = 1 L
1.2
Volume of distribution (L)
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0 2 4 6 8
10 12 14
2 0 4 6 8 10 12 14
Time (min) Time (min)
Fig. 4.3 Simulation of concentration (left) and distribution volume (right) changes over time following
a bolus dose for a single-tank (one-compartment) model. The distribution volume remains constant
throughout. (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al, eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders Elsevier; 2014:Fig. 24.3.)
An important point illustrated in Fig. 4.4 is that drug not
only distributes to the peripheral tank and thus increases
the volume of distribution, but it also binds to tissue in that
tank. This process further lowers the measurable concentra-
tion in the central tank. Thus, the total volume of distribu-
tion may even be larger than the two tanks added together.
In fact, some anesthetics have huge distribution volumes
(e.g., fentanyl has an apparent distribution volume of 4 L/
kg) that are substantially larger than an individual’s vascu-
lar volume (0.07 L/kg) or extracellular volume (0.2 L/kg).
With an additional tank, the volume of distribution
no longer remains constant over time. As illustrated in
Fig. 4.5, at time = 0, the volume of distribution is esti-
mated as 4.3 L, the same as that of the model presented in
Fig. 4.3, which has only one tank. The volume of distribu-
tion then increases to 48 L over the next 10 minutes. The
increase is due to the distribution of drug to the periph-
eral volume and elimination once drug is in the body.
The amount of drug that moves to the peripheral tissue
commonly surpasses the amount that is eliminated dur-
ing the first few minutes after drug administration. As an
example, consider a simulation of a propofol bolus that
plots the accumulation of propofol in peripheral tissues
and the amount eliminated over time (Fig. 4.6). During
the first 4 minutes, the amount distributed to the periph-
eral tissue is larger than the amount eliminated from the
body. Following 4 minutes, the amounts reverse.␣
Clearance
Clearance describes the rate of drug removal from the
plasma/blood. Two processes contribute to drug clear-
ance: systemic (out of the tank) and intercompartmental
35 35
II
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
(between the tanks) clearance (Fig. 4.7). Systemic clear-
ance permanently removes drug from the body, either
by eliminating the parent molecule or by transforming
it into metabolites. Intercompartmental clearance moves
drug between plasma and peripheral tissue tanks. By way
of clarification, in this chapter the words compartment
and tank are used interchangeably.
Clearance is defined in units of flow, that is, the vol-
ume completely cleared of drug per unit of time (e.g., L/
min). Clearance is not to be confused with elimination
rate (e.g., mg/min). To explain why elimination rates do
Dose = 10 mg
Tissue bound
Blood or plasma
Tissue
Concentration = 2.5 mg/L
Volume of distribution = 10 mg/(2.5 mg/L) = 4 L
Fig. 4.4 Schematic of a two-tank model. The total volume of dis-
tribution consists of the sum of the two tanks. The blue dots in
the ellipse in the peripheral volume represent tissue-bound drug.
The measured concentration in the blood or plasma is 2.5 mg/
mL just after a bolus dose of 10 mg. Using Fig. 4.1, this leads to
a distribution volume of 4 L. (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson
LI, et al, eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders
Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.4.)
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Concentration (µg/mL)
not accurately characterize clearance, consider the simu-
lation presented in Fig. 4.8. Using the volume of distri-
bution, the total amount of drug can be calculated at
every measured drug concentration. The concentration
change in time window A is larger than that in time
window B even though they are both 1 minute in dura-
tion. The elimination rates are 27 and 12 mg/min for
time windows A and B, respectively. They are different
and neither can be used as a parameter to predict drug
concentrations when another dose of drug is adminis-
tered. Because of this limitation with elimination rate,
clearance was developed to provide a single number to
describe the decay in drug concentration presented in
Fig. 4.8.
For discussion purposes, assume that concentration is
the power necessary to push drug out of the water tank.
The higher the concentration, the larger the amount of
drug eliminated. To standardize the elimination rate, the
eliminated amount of drug is scaled to concentration. For
example, the elimination rate in time window A (27 mg/
min) scaled to the mean concentration during that time
window (15 µg/mL) is 0.001807 mg/min/mg/L. Reducing
the units gives 0.002 L/min. Normalizing the elimination
rate in time window B to concentration gives the same
result as A. If the time interval is narrowed so that the
time window approaches zero, the definition of clearance
becomes:
Eq. 3
Cearance=
t
(t)
where dA/dt is the rate of drug elimination at given
time t, and C (t) is the corresponding concentration at
50
Volume of distribution (L)
40
30
20
10
0
0 2 4 6 8
10 12 14 16 2 0 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Time (min) Time (min)
Fig. 4.5 Simulation of concentration and apparent distribution volume changes over time following a
bolus dose for a two-tank (two-compartment) model. On the left, the dots represent measured drug
concentrations. The solid line represents a mathematical equation fit to the measured concentrations.
The dotted line represents an extrapolation of the mathematical equation (i.e., pharmacokinetic model) to
time 0. On the right, the apparent distribution volume is time dependent with the initial volume of distri-
bution much smaller than the distribution volume at near steady state. The apparent distribution volume
of time 0 is not a true reflection of the actual volume of distribution. (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson
LI, et al, eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.5.)
Extrapolated to Time 0
Volume of
distribution = 47.7 L
Volume of distribution
at Time 0 = 4.27 L calculated
from extrapolated concentration
to Time 0
36
time t. Rearranging Eq. 3, clearance can be expressed as
follows:
Eq. 4
Cearance= ( in out)
in
where Q is the blood flow to metabolic organs, Cin is the
concentration of drug delivered to metabolic organs, and
Cout is the concentration of drug leaving metabolic organs.
The fraction of inflowing drug extracted by the organ
100
Amount of drug distributed
to peripheral tissue
80
Amount of drug (mg)
60
Cumulative elimination
amount of drug
40
20
0
1
0 2 3 4 5 6
Time (min)
Fig. 4.6 Simulation of propofol accumulation in the periph-
eral tissues (blue line) and the cumulative amount of propofol
eliminated (yellow line) following a 2-mg/kg propofol bolus to
a 77-kg (170-lb), 177-cm (5 ft 10 in) tall, 53-year-old man,
using published pharmacokinetic model parameters.1 Drug in-
dicates propofol. (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al,
eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier;
2015:Fig. 24.6.)
Blood or plasma Tissue
Systemic clearance
Intercompartmental
clearance
Fig. 4.7 Schematic of a two-tank model illustrating two sources
of drug removal from the central tank (blood or plasma): systemic
and intercompartmental clearance. (From Miller RD, Cohen NH,
Eriksson LI, et al, eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.8.)
Chapter 4 Basic Pharmacologic Principles
is (Cin − Cout)/Cin and is called the extraction ratio (ER).
Clearance can be estimated as organ blood flow multiplied
by the ER. Eq. 4 can be simplified as shown here:
Eq. 5
Cearance=
The total clearance is the sum of each clearance by meta-
bolic organs such as the liver, kidney, and other tissues
(Fig. 4.9).
Hepatic clearance has been well characterized. For
example, the relationship between clearance, liver blood
flow, and the extraction ratio is presented in Fig. 4.10.
2 For
drugs with an extraction ratio of nearly 1 (e.g., propofol),
a change in liver blood flow produces a nearly propor-
tional change in clearance. For drugs with a low extrac-
tion ratio (e.g., alfentanil), clearance is nearly independent
of the rate of liver blood flow. If nearly 100% of the drug
is extracted by the liver, this implies that the liver has
tremendous metabolic capacity for the drug. In this case,
the rate-limiting step in metabolism is flow of drug to the
liver, and such drugs are said to be “flow limited.” Any
reduction in liver blood flow, such as usually accompanies
anesthesia, can be expected to reduce clearance. However,
moderate changes in hepatic metabolic function per se
will have little impact on clearance because hepatic meta-
bolic capacity is overwhelmingly in excess of demand.
For many drugs (e.g., alfentanil), the extraction ratio
is considerably less than 1. For these drugs, clearance is
limited by the capacity of the liver to take up and metab-
olize drug. These drugs are said to be “capacity limited.”
Clearance will change in response to any change in the
capacity of the liver to metabolize such drugs, as might
be caused by liver disease or enzymatic induction. How-
ever, changes in liver blood flow, as might be caused by
the anesthetic state itself, usually have little influence on
clearance because the liver handles only a fraction of the
drug that it sees anyway.␣
Front-End Kinetics
Front-end kinetics refers to the description of intravenous
drug behavior immediately following administration.
How rapidly a drug moves from the blood into periph-
eral tissues directly influences the peak plasma drug
concentration. With compartmental models, an impor-
tant assumption is that an intravenous bolus instantly
mixes in the central volume, with the peak concentration
occurring at the moment of injection without elimina-
tion or distribution to peripheral tissues. For simulation
purposes, the initial concentration and volume of distri-
bution at time = 0 are extrapolated as if the circulation
had been infinitely fast. This, of course, is not real. If drug
is injected into an arm vein and that initial concentra-
tion is measured in a radial artery, drug appears in the
arterial circulation 30 to 40 seconds after injection. The
delay likely represents the time required for drug to pass
through the venous volume of the upper part of the arm,
37 37
II
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
30
Vd = 4.3 (L)
25
Concentration of drug (µg/mL)
20
CON = 18.29 (µg/mL), AMT = 78.09 mg
15
A
CON = 11.9 (µg/mL), AMT = 50.81 mg
10
B
5
CON = 8.24 (µg/mL), AMT = 35.18 mg
CON = 5.36 (µg/mL), AMT = 22.89 mg
0
2 0 4 6 8
12
14
10 16
Time (min)
Fig. 4.8 Simulation of drug concentration changes when a drug is administered to a single-tank model
with linear elimination (see Fig. 4.2). The concentration changes for two time windows are labeled with
diagonal lines from 1 to 2 minutes (time window A) and from 3 to 4 minutes (time window B), respectively.
The concentrations (CON) at the beginning and end of each time window are used to calculate the amount
(AMT) of drug that is eliminated (see text). Vd, Volume of distribution. (Modified from Miller RD, Cohen NH,
Eriksson LI, et al, eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.9.)
heart, great vessels, and peripheral arterial circulation.
More sophisticated models (e.g., a recirculatory model)3
account for this delay and are useful when characteriz-
ing the behavior of a drug immediately following bolus
administration, such as with induction agents, when the
speed of onset and duration of action are of interest.␣
Compartmental Pharmacokinetic Models
Compartmental models have no physiologic correlate.
They are built by using mathematical expressions fit to
concentration over time data and then reparameterized in
terms of volumes and clearances. The one-compartment
model presented in Fig. 4.11 contains a single volume and
a single clearance. Although used for several drugs, this
model is perhaps oversimplified for anesthetic drugs. To
better model anesthetic drugs, clinical pharmacologists
have developed two or three compartment models that
contain several tanks connected by pipes. As illustrated
in Fig. 4.11, the volume to the right in the two-compart-
ment model—and in the center of the three- compartment
model—is the central volume. The other volumes are
peripheral volumes. The sum of the all volumes is the
volume of distribution at steady state, Vdss. Clearance in
which the central compartment is left for the outside is
the central or metabolic clearance. Clearances between the
central compartment and the peripheral compartments are
the intercompartmental clearances.␣
Multicompartment Models
Plasma concentrations over time after an intravenous
bolus resemble the curve in Fig. 4.12. This curve has the
characteristics common to most drugs when given as an
intravenous bolus. First, the concentrations continuously
decrease over time. Second, the rate of decline is initially
steep but continuously becomes less steep, until we get to
a portion that is log-linear.
For many drugs, three distinct phases can be dis-
tinguished, as illustrated for fentanyl in Fig. 4.12. A
rapid-distribution phase (blue line) begins immedi-
ately after injection of the bolus. Very rapid movement
of the drug from plasma to the rapidly equilibrating
tissues characterizes this phase. Next, a second slow-
distribution phase (red line) is characterized by move-
ment of drug into more slowly equilibrating tissues
38
Venous blood Arterial blood
Q × Cout Heart
Q × Cin
Liver Kidney Tissue
Blood flow = Q
Clearance (L/min)
dA/dt = Q × Cin – Q × Cout
Fig. 4.9 Schematic of drug extraction. A, Amount of drug; Cin
and Cout, drug concentrations presented to and leaving metabolic
organs; dA/dt, drug elimination rate; Q, blood flow. (From Miller
RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al, eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed.
Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.10.)
Extraction
ratio
3.0 1.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
Extraction ratio calculated
at Q = 1.4 L/min°
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
1.0
0.5
0.4
0.5
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.5
0 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0
Liver blood flow (L/min)
Fig. 4.10 Relationship among liver blood flow (Q), clearance,
and extraction ratio. For drugs with a high extraction ratio, clear-
ance is nearly identical to liver blood flow. For drugs with a low
extraction ratio, changes in liver blood flow have almost no ef-
fect on clearance.2 (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al,
eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier;
2015:Fig. 24.11.)
Chapter 4 Basic Pharmacologic Principles
One-compartment
model
Drug administration
I
V
Volume of
distribution
k
k21
Two-compartment
model
Drug administration
I
k12
V2
Peripheral
compartment
V1
Central
compartment
k10
Three-compartment
model
Drug administration
I
V2
Rapidly equilibrating
compartment
k21
k12 k13
V1
Central
compartment
k31
V3
Slowly equilibrating
compartment
k10
Fig. 4.11 One-, two-, and three-compartment mammillary
models. (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al, eds. Mill-
er’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig.
24.12.)
Rapid
Concentration
Intermediate
Slow
100
10
1
0 120 240
360 480 600
Minutes since bolus injection
Fig. 4.12 Hydraulic model of fentanyl pharmacokinetics. Drug is
administered into the central tank, from which it can distribute
into two peripheral tanks, or it may be eliminated. The volume
of the tanks is proportional to the volumes of distribution. The
cross-sectional area of the pipes is proportional to clearance.4
(From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al, eds. Miller’s Anes-
thesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.13.)
39 39
II
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
and return of drug to plasma from the most rapidly
equilibrating tissues. Third, the terminal phase (green
line) is nearly a straight line when plotted on a semi-
logarithmic graph. The terminal phase is often called
the “elimination phase” because the primary mecha-
nism for decreasing drug concentration during the ter-
minal phase is elimination of drug from the body. The
distinguishing characteristic of the terminal elimina-
tion phase is that the plasma concentration is lower
than tissue concentrations and the relative proportion
of drug in plasma and peripheral volumes of distribu-
tion remains constant. During this terminal phase, drug
returns from the rapid- and slow-distribution volumes
to plasma and is permanently removed from plasma by
metabolism or excretion.
The presence of three distinct phases after bolus injec-
tion is a defining characteristic of a mammillary model
with three compartments.4 In this model, shown in
Fig. 4.12, there are three tanks corresponding (from left
to right) to the slowly equilibrating peripheral compart-
ment, the central compartment (the plasma, into which
drug is injected), and the rapidly equilibrating peripheral
compartment. The horizontal pipes represent intercom-
partmental clearance or (for the pipe draining onto the
page) metabolic clearance. The volumes of each tank
correspond to the volumes of the compartments for fen-
tanyl. The cross-sectional areas of the pipes correlate
with fentanyl systemic and intercompartmental clear-
ance. The height of water in each tank corresponds to
drug concentration. By using this hydraulic model we
can follow the processes that decrease drug concen-
tration over time after bolus injection. Initially, drug
flows from the central compartment to both peripheral
compartments via intercompartmental clearance and
completely out of the model via metabolic clearance.
Because there are three places for drug to go, the con-
centration in the central compartment decreases very
rapidly. At the transition between the blue line and the
red line, there is a change in the role of the most rapidly
equilibrating compartment. At this transition, the con-
centration in the central compartment falls below the
concentration in the rapidly equilibrating compartment,
and the direction of flow between them is reversed. After
this transition (red line), drug in plasma has only two
places to go: into the slowly equilibrating compartment
or out the drain pipe. These processes are partly offset
by the return of drug to plasma from the rapidly equil-
ibrating compartment. The net effect is that once the
rapidly equilibrating compartment has come to equili-
bration, the concentration in the central compartment
falls far more slowly than before.
Once the concentration in the central compartment
decreases below both the rapidly and slowly equili-
brating compartments (green line), the only method of
decreasing the plasma concentration is metabolic clear-
ance, the drain pipe. Return of drug from both peripheral
40
compartments to the central compartment greatly slows
the rate of decrease in plasma drug concentration.
Curves that continuously decrease over time, with
a continuously increasing slope (i.e., like the curve in
Fig. 4.12), can be described by a sum of negative expo-
nentials. In pharmacokinetics, one way of denoting this
sum of exponentials is to say that the plasma concentra-
tion over time is as follows:
Eq. 6
(t)= A t t C t
where t is the time since the bolus injection, C (t) is the
drug concentration after a bolus dose, and A, α, B, β, C,
and γ are parameters of a pharmacokinetic model. A, B,
and C are coefficients, whereas α, β, and γ are exponents.
After a bolus injection, all six of the parameters in Eq. 6
will be greater than 0. Polyexponential equations are used
mainly because they describe the plasma concentrations
observed after bolus injection, except for the misspecifi-
cation in the first few minutes, mentioned previously.
Compartmental pharmacokinetic models are strictly
empiric. These models have no anatomic correlate. They
are based solely on fitting equations to measured plasma
concentrations following a known dose. Kinetic models
are transformed into models that characterize concentra-
tion changes over time in terms of volumes and clear-
ances. Although more intuitive, they have no physiologic
correlate.
Special significance is often ascribed to the smallest
exponent. This exponent determines the slope of the final
log-linear portion of the curve. When the medical liter-
ature refers to the half-life of a drug, unless otherwise
stated, the half-life will be the terminal half-life. How-
ever, the terminal half-life for drugs with more than one
exponential term is nearly uninterpretable. The terminal
half-life sets an upper limit on the time required for the
concentrations to decrease by 50% after drug administra-
tion. Usually, the time needed for a 50% decrease will be
much faster than that upper limit.
Part of the continuing popularity of pharmacokinetic
compartmental models is that they can be transformed
from an unintuitive exponential form to a more intuitive
compartmental form, as shown in Fig. 4.11. Microrate
constants, expressed as kij, define the rate of drug trans-
fer from compartment i to compartment j. Compart-
ment 0 is the compartment outside the model, so k10
is the microrate constant for processes acting through
metabolism or elimination that irreversibly remove drug
from the central compartment (analogous to k for a one-
compartment model). The intercompartmental microrate
constants (k12, k21, etc.) describe movement of drug
between the central and peripheral compartments. Each
peripheral compartment has at least two microrate con-
stants, one for drug entry and one for drug exit. The
microrate constants for the two- and three-compartment
models can be seen in Fig. 4.11.␣
4
Concentration (µg/mL)
3
2
30
min
40
min
65 min
1
0
30 0 60 90 120 150 240
180
210
Time (min)
Fig. 4.13 Simulation of decrement times for a target-controlled
infusion set to maintain a target propofol concentration of 4 µg/
mL for 30, 60, and 120 minutes. Once terminated, the time re-
quired to reach 0.5 µg/mL was 30, 40, and 65 minutes for each
infusion, respectively. Simulations of the decrement times used a
published pharmacokinetic model.1 (From Miller RD, Cohen NH,
Eriksson LI, et al, eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.14.)
Back-End Kinetics
Using estimates of distribution volume and clearance,
back-end kinetics is a useful tool that describes the
behavior of intravenous drugs when administered as con-
tinuous infusions. Back-end kinetics provides descrip-
tors of how plasma drug concentrations decrease once
a continuous infusion is terminated. An example is
decrement time. It predicts the time required to reach a
certain plasma concentration once an infusion is termi-
nated. Decrement times are a function of infusion dura-
tion. Consider the example of decrement times for a set of
continuous target-controlled infusions (Fig. 4.13). In this
simulation, target-controlled infusion (TCI) of propofol is
set to maintain a concentration of 4 µg/mL for 30, 60,
and 120 minutes. Once the infusion is stopped, the time
to reach 0.5 µg/mL is estimated. As illustrated, the longer
the infusion, the longer the time required to reach 0.5 µg/
mL. This example demonstrates how drugs accumulate in
peripheral tissues with prolonged infusions. This accumu-
lation prolongs the decrement time.
Another use of decrement times is as a tool to compare
drugs within a drug class (e.g., opioids). As a comparator,
plots of decrement times are presented as a function of
infusion duration. When used this way, decrement times
are determined as the time required to reach a target per-
centage of the concentration immediately after termination
of a continuous infusion. Examples of 50% and 80% decre-
ment times for selected opioids and sedatives are presented
in Fig. 4.14. Of note, for shorter infusions, the decrement
times are similar for both classes of anesthetic drugs. Once
infusion duration exceeds 2 hours, the decrement times
Chapter 4 Basic Pharmacologic Principles
vary substantially. A popular decrement time is the 50%
decrement time, also known as the context-sensitive half-
time.5 The term context-sensitive refers to infusion dura-
tion. The term half-time refers to the 50% decrement time.␣
Biophase
Biophase refers to the time delay between changes in
plasma concentration and drug effect. Biophase accounts
for the time required for drug to diffuse from the plasma to
the site of action plus the time required, once drug is at the
site of action, to elicit a drug effect. A simulation of vari-
ous propofol bolus doses and their predicted effect on the
electroencephalogram (EEG) bispectral index scale (BIS) is
presented in Fig. 4.15. The time to peak effect for each dose
is identical (approximately 1.5 minutes following the peak
plasma concentration). The difference between each dose
is the magnitude and duration of effect. A key principle
is that when drug concentrations are in flux (i.e., during
induction of anesthesia and emergence from anesthesia),
changes in drug effect will lag behind changes in drug
concentration. This lag between the plasma concentration
and effect usually results in the phenomenon called hys-
teresis, in which two different plasma concentrations cor-
respond to one drug effect or one plasma concentration
corresponds to two drug effects. For example, Fig. 4.15
shows that the different concentrations at C and c cor-
respond to the same BIS score.
To collapse the hysteresis between plasma concentra-
tion and effect and to match one plasma concentration to
one drug effect, this lag is often modeled with an “effect
site” compartment added to the central compartment.
Kinetic microrate constants used to describe biophase
include k1e and ke0. The k1e describes drug movement
from the central compartment to the effect site and ke0
describes the elimination of drug from the effect site
compartment. There are two important assumptions with
the effect-site compartment: (1) The amount of drug that
moves from the central compartment to the effect-site
compartment is negligible and vice versa, and (2) there is
no volume estimate to the effect-site compartment.
Typically, the relationship between plasma and the site
of drug effect is modeled with an effect-site model, as
shown in Fig. 4.16. The site of drug effect is connected
to plasma by a first-order process. Eq. 7 relates effect-site
concentration to plasma concentration:
Eq. 7
= ( )
t
where Ce is the effect-site concentration, Cp is the plasma
drug concentration, and ke0 is the rate constant for elimi-
nation of drug. The constant ke0 describes the rate of rise
and offset of drug effect (Fig. 4.17).
In summary, the conventional pharmacokinetic term
half-life has little meaning to anesthesia providers, who
41 41
II
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
50% decremental time (min)
(Context-sensitive half-time)
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Midazolam
Propofol
Thiopental
Dexmedetomidine
50% decremental time (min)
(Context-sensitive half-time)
Alfentanil
Fentanyl
Sufentanil
Remifentanil
400
500
0 100 200 300 600
Time (min)
0 100 200 300 600
400
500
Time (min)
80% decremental time (min)
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
80% decremental time (min)
work with drugs whose clinical behavior is not well
described by half-life. The pharmacokinetic principles
discussed in this section (such as volume of distribu-
tion, clearance, elimination, front-end kinetics, back-end
kinetics, context-sensitive half-time, and biophase) better
illustrate how an anesthetic will behave.␣
PHARMACODYNAMIC PRINCIPLES
Simply stated, pharmacokinetics describes what the body
does to the drug, whereas pharmacodynamics describes
what the drug does to the body. In particular, pharmaco-
dynamics describes the relationship between drug con-
centration and pharmacologic effect.
Models used to describe the concentration-effect rela-
tionships are created in much the same way as phar-
macokinetic models; they are based on observations
and used to create a mathematical model. To create a
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
400
500
0 100 200 300 600
Time (min)
400
500
0 100 200 300 600
Time (min)
Fig. 4.14 These graphs show 50% and 80% decrement times for selected sedatives (left side) and opioids
(right side). The vertical axis refers to the time required to reach the desired decrement time. The horizon-
tal axis refers to infusion duration. Simulations of the decrement times used published pharmacokinetic
models for each sedative and analgesic.5-10 (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al, eds. Miller’s
Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.15.)
pharmacodynamic model, plasma drug levels and a
selected drug effect are measured simultaneously. For
example, consider the measured plasma concentrations
of an intravenous anesthetic drug following a bolus dose
and the associated changes on the EEG spectral edge fre-
quency (a measure of anesthetic depth) from one indi-
vidual, presented in Fig. 4.18. Shortly after the plasma
concentration peaks, the spectral edge starts to decrease,
reaches a nadir, and then returns back to baseline as the
plasma concentrations drop to near 0.
Combining data from several individuals and plotting
the measured concentrations versus the observed effect
(modified to be a percentage of the maximal effect across
all individuals) creates a hysteresis loop (Fig. 4.19). The
ascending portion of the loop represents rising drug con-
centrations (see arrow). While rising, the increase in drug
effect lags behind the increase in drug concentration. For
the descending loop, the decrease drug effect lags behind
the decrease in drug concentration.
42
Plasma concentration (µg/mL)
Time delay from peak plasma to peak effect
C
0.5 mg/kg
0.7 mg/kg
1.0 mg/kg
c
Line A
Bispectral index
20
15
10
5
0
100
80
60
40
20
0
0 2 1 4 3 7 6 5 10
8
9
Time (min)
Fig. 4.15 Demonstration of biophase. The top plot presents a
simulation of three propofol doses and the resultant plasma con-
centrations. The bottom plot presents a simulation of the pre-
dicted effect on the bispectral index scale (BIS). These simulations
assume linear kinetics: regardless of the dose, effects peak at the
same time (Line A), as do the plasma concentration. The time to
peak effect is 1.5 minutes. Even the plasma concentrations of
points C and c are different; however, the BIS scores of those two
points are the same. This finding demonstrates the hysteresis be-
tween plasma concentration and BIS score. Simulations used pub-
lished pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic models.1,7 (From
Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al, eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th
ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.16.)
To create a pharmacodynamic model, the hysteresis
loop is collapsed using modeling techniques that account
for the lag time between plasma concentrations and the
observed effect. These modeling techniques provide an
estimate of the lag time, known as the t½ke0, and an esti-
mate of the effect-site concentration (Ce) associated with
a 50% probability of drug effect (C50). Most concentra-
tion-effect relationships in anesthesia are described with
a sigmoid curve. The standard equation for this relation-
ship is the Hill equation, also known as the sigmoid Emax
relationship (Eq. 8):
Eq. 8
ect= ma
Chapter 4 Basic Pharmacologic Principles
V2
Rapidly equilibrating
compartment
k21
Drug administration
I
k12 k13
V1
Central
compartment
k10 k1e
V3
Slowly equilibrating
compartment
Effect site
Ve
ke0
Fig. 4.16 A three-compartment model with an added effect site
to account for the delay in equilibration between the rise and fall
in arterial drug concentrations and the onset and offset of drug
effect. The effect site is assumed to have a negligible volume.
(From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al, eds. Miller’s Anes-
thesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.17.)
Effect-site concentration (µg/mL)
8
6
4
2
0
ke0 0.2
ke0 0.4
ke0 0.8
8
0 2 4 6 10
Time (min)
Fig. 4.17 Effect of the ke0 changes. As the ke0 decreases, the
time to peak effect is prolonged.1,7,11 (From Miller RD, Cohen NH,
Eriksson LI, et al, eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.18.)
where E0 is the baseline effect, Emax is the maximal effect,
C is the drug concentration, and γ represents the slope of
the concentration-effect relationship; γ is also known as
the Hill coefficient. For values of γ less than 1, the curve
is hyperbolic, and for values greater than 1, the curve is
sigmoid. Fig. 4.20 presents an example of this relation-
ship: a fentanyl effect-site concentration-effect curve for
analgesia. This example illustrates how C50 and γ charac-
terize the concentration-effect relationship.
Potency and Efficacy
Two important concepts are relevant to this relation-
ship: potency and efficacy. Potency describes the
amount of drug required to elicit an effect. The C50
is a common parameter used to describe potency. For
43 43
II
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Plasma concentrations (ng/mL)
Baseline
effect
Maximal effect
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Spectral edge (Hz)
Collapsed loop
250
200
150
100
50
0
8
9
0 2 1 4 3 7 6 5 10 11 12 13 14 15
Time (min)
Fig. 4.18 Schematic representation of drug plasma concentra-
tions (blue circles) following a bolus and the associated changes
in the electroencephalogram’s spectral edge (red line) measured
in one individual. Note that changes in spectral edge lag behind
changes in plasma concentrations. (From Miller RD, Cohen NH,
Eriksson LI, et al, eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.19.)
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0
10 40
20 60
30
50
Plasma or effect-site drug concentration (ng/mL)
Fig. 4.19 Schematic representation of plasma concentrations
versus normalized spectral edge measurements (presented as
a percentage of maximal effect) from several individuals (blue
circles). The black arrows indicate the ascending and descending
arms of a hysteresis loop that coincide with increasing and de-
creasing drug concentrations. The red line represents the phar-
macodynamic model developed from collapsing the hysteresis
loop. EEG, electroencephalogram. (From Miller RD, Cohen NH,
Eriksson LI, et al, eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.20.)
drugs that have a concentration-versus-effect relation-
ship that is shifted to the left (small C50), the drug is
considered to be more potent, and the reverse is true
for drugs that have a concentration-versus-effect rela-
tionship shifted to the right. For example, as illustrated
in Fig. 4.21, the analgesia C50 for some of the fentanyl
congeners ranges from small for sufentanil (0.04 ng/mL)
EEG changes (% of maximum)
Descending
Ascending
44
Probability of analgesia
Dynamic range
50%
probability
of effect
γ
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0 1 4
3 2 6 5
Fentanyl concentration (ng/mL)
Fig. 4.20 A pharmacodynamic model for the analgesic effect of
fentanyl. The green area represents the dynamic range, the con-
centration range where changes in concentration lead to a change
in effect. Concentrations above or below the dynamic range do
not lead to changes in drug effect. The C50 represents the con-
centration associated with 50% probability of analgesia. Gamma
(γ) represents the slope of the curve in the dynamic range. (From
Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al, eds. Miller’s Anesthesia.
8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.21.)
C50
Fentanyl
Alfentanil
Remifentanil
Sufentanil
Probability of analgesia
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
1
0.001 0.01 10
100
0.1 1000
Fentanyl concentration (ng/mL)
Fig. 4.21 Pharmacodynamic models for fentanyl congeners.
The C50 for each drug is different, but the slope and maximal
effect are similar.12 (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al,
eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier;
2015:Fig. 24.22.)
to large for alfentanil (75 ng/mL). Thus, sufentanil is
more potent than alfentanil.
Efficacy is a measure of drug effectiveness once it
occupies a receptor. Similar drugs that work through the
same receptor may have varying degrees of effective-
ness despite having the same receptor occupancy. For
Panel A
Panel B
Panel C
Y
Drug Y (Ce)
Y
y
Y
y
Drug Y (Ce)
y
Drug Y (Ce)
0 0 0
0 X
x 0 X
x
Drug X (Ce)
Drug X (Ce)
0 X x
Drug X (Ce)
Fig. 4.22 Drug interactions. For two drugs, X and Y, Panel A rep-
resents additive, Panel B represents synergistic, and Panel C rep-
resents antagonistic interactions. Ce, Effect-site concentration.
(From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al, eds. Miller’s Anes-
thesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.26.)
example, with G protein–coupled receptors, some drugs
may bind the receptor in such a way as to produce a
more pronounced activation of second messengers, caus-
ing more of an effect than others. Drugs that achieve
maximal effect are known as full agonists and those that
have a less than maximal effect are known as partial
agonists.␣
Anesthetic Drug Interactions
An average clinical anesthetic rarely consists of one drug
but rather a combination of drugs to achieve desired levels
of hypnosis, analgesia, and muscle relaxation. Hypnotics,
analgesics (also see Chapter 9), and muscle relaxants (also
see Chapter 11) all interact with one another such that
each drug, when administered in the presence of other
drugs, rarely behaves as if it were administered alone. For
example, when an analgesic is administered in the pres-
ence of a hypnotic, analgesia is more profound with the
hypnotic than by itself, and hypnosis is more profound
with the analgesic than by itself. Thus, anesthesia is the
practice of applied drug interactions. This phenomenon is
likely a function of each class of drug exerting an effect
on different receptors.
Substantial studies have been performed explor-
ing how anesthetic drugs interact with one another. As
illustrated in Fig. 4.22, interactions have been charac-
terized as antagonistic, additive, and synergistic. When
drugs that have an additive interaction are coadminis-
tered, their overall effect is the sum of the two individual
effects. With antagonistic interactions, the overall effect
is less than if the drug combination was additive; with
synergistic interactions, the overall effect is greater than
if the drug combination was additive.
A term used to characterize the continuum of drug
concentrations across various combinations of drug
pairs (X in combination with Y) is the isobole. The iso-
bole is an isoeffect line for a selected probability of
effect. A common isobole is the 50% isobole line. It rep-
resents all possible combinations of two-drug effect-site
concentrations that would lead to a 50% probability of a
Chapter 4 Basic Pharmacologic Principles
C95Y
Drug Y (Ce)
C50Y
0
0 C95X
C50X
Drug X (Ce)
Fig. 4.23 Schematic illustration of isoeffect (isobole) lines. The
red, green, and blue lines represent the 50% and 95% isoboles
for a synergistic interaction between drugs X and Y. Isoboles rep-
resent concentration pairs with an equivalent effect. A set of 5%,
50%, and 95% isoboles can be used to describe the dynamic
range of the concentrations for drugs X and Y for a given effect.
As with single concentration effect curves, the ideal dosing leads
to concentration pairs that are near the 95% isobole. Ce, Effect-
site concentration. (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al,
eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier;
2015:Fig. 24.27.)
given effect. Other isoboles are of more clinical interest.
For example, the 95% isobole for loss of responsiveness
represents the concentration pairs necessary to ensure
a 95% probability of unresponsiveness. Similarly, the
5% isobole represents the concentration pairs having a
low likelihood of that effect (i.e., most patients would
be responsive). When formulating an anesthetic dosing
regimen, dosing an anesthetic to achieve a probability
of effect just above but not far beyond the 95% isobole
is ideal (Fig. 4.23).
Several researchers have developed mathematical
models that characterize anesthetic drug interactions in
three dimensions. These models are known as response
surface models and include effect-site concentrations
for each drug as well as a probability estimate of the
overall effect. Fig. 4.24 presents the propofol-remifen-
tanil interaction for loss of responsiveness as published
by Bouillon and associates.
13 The response surface
presents the full range of remifentanil-propofol isobo-
les (0% to 100%) for loss of responsiveness. There are
two common representations of the response surface
model: the three-dimensional plot and the topographic
plot. The topographic plot represents a top-down view
of the response surface with drug concentrations on
the vertical and horizontal axes. Drug effect is repre-
sented with selected isobole lines (i.e., 5%, 50%, and
95%).
45 45
II
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Propofol Ce (µg/mL)
20
10
5
2
1
Propofol
Remifentanil Equivalents
Fentanyl 1.5 µg/kg
Propofol 2 mg/kg
Fentanyl 1.5 µg/kg
Remifentanil 0.2 µg/kg/min
Propofol 100 µg/kg/min
A
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120
Time (minutes)
Induction
Maintenance
Infusions Turned Off
Propofol Ce µg/mL
10
8
6
4
2
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Remifentanil ng/mL
Fig. 4.24 Simulation of a 90-minute total intravenous anesthetic consisting of propofol bolus (2 mg/kg)
and infusion (100 µg/kg/min), remifentanil infusion (0.2 µg/kg/min), and intermittent fentanyl boluses
(1.5 µg/kg). (A) Resultant effect-site concentrations (Ce) are presented. (B) Predictions of loss of respon-
siveness are presented on a topographic (top-down) view.
95% Isobole
50% Isobole
5% Isobole
B
46
20
10
5
Ce (ng/mL)
2
1
Remifentanil Equivalents
Chapter 4 Basic Pharmacologic Principles
Induction
Maintenance
Infusions Turned Off
Probability of Loss of
Responsiveness
100
80
60
40
20
95%
Isobole
50%
Isobole
II
C
0
10
8
6
4 6
Propofol Ce (µg/mL)
8
2
0
2 4
0
Remifentanil
Ce (µg/mL)
5%
Isobole
10 12
Fig. 4.24, cont’d (C) On a three-dimensional response surface plot, the green, black, and yellow lines
represent the 5%, 50%, and 95% isoboles, respectively. Each isobole presents the propofol-remifentanil
pairs that yield the same effect. The inward bow of the isoboles indicates that the interaction is syner-
gistic. The isoboles are in close proximity to one another, indicating a steep transition from responsive to
unresponsive. (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al, eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.29. Author’s representation based on data from Bouillon TW, Bruhn J,
Radulescu L, et al. Pharmacodynamic interaction between propofol and remifentanil regarding hypnosis,
tolerance of laryngoscopy, bispectral index, and electroencyphalographic apprpoximate entropy. Anesthe-
siology. 2004;100(6):1353–1372.
Response surface models have been developed for a
variety of anesthetic effects to include responses to ver-
bal and tactile stimuli, painful stimuli, hemodynamic or
respiratory effects, and changes in electrical brain activ-
ity. For example, with airway instrumentation, response
surface models have been developed for loss of response
to placing a laryngeal mask airway,14 laryngoscopy,15,16
tracheal intubation,17 and esophageal instrumentation18
for selected combinations of anesthetic drugs. Although
many response surface models exist, there are several
gaps in available models covering all common combi-
nations of anesthetic drugs and various forms of stimuli
encountered in the perioperative environment.␣
other patient characteristics remain difficult to assess
(e.g., chronic opioid exposure). The findings are briefly
summarized to characterize the pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics in a few unique special populations.
Influence of Obesity on Anesthetic Drugs
SPECIAL POPULATIONS
When formulating an anesthetic, many aspects of patient
demographics and medical history need to be considered to
determine the correct dose. Such factors include age; body
habitus; gender; chronic exposure to opioids, benzodiaz-
epines, or alcohol; presence of heart, lung, kidney, or liver
disease; and the extent of blood loss or dehydration. Each of
them can dramatically impact anesthetic drug kinetics and
dynamics. How some patient characteristics (e.g., obesity)
influence anesthetic drug behavior has been studied, whereas
Obesity is a worldwide epidemic, and overweight patients
frequently undergo anesthesia and surgery. Therefore,
anesthesia providers should be familiar with the pharma-
cologic alterations of anesthetics in obese individuals. In
general, manufacturer dosing recommendations are scaled
to kilograms of actual total body weight (TBW). However,
anesthesia providers rarely use mg/kg dosing in obese
patients for fear of administering an excessive dose (e.g.,
a 136-kg patient does not require twice as much drug as
a patient of the same height who weighs 68 kg). Accord-
ingly researchers have developed several weight scalars
in an attempt to avoid excessive dosing or underdosing
in this patient population. Some of these scalars include
lean body mass (LBM), ideal body weight (IBW), and fat-
free mass (FFM). Table 4.1 presents the formulas used to
estimate these weight scalars. Table 4.2 presents samples
of the resultant scaled weight for a lean individual and
an obese individual. In general, the aim of weight scalars
is to match dosing regimens for obese patients with what
47 47
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Table 4.1 Common Weight Scalars
Scalara Equations
Ideal body weight Male:
50 kg + 2.3 kg for each 2.54
cm (1 inch) over 152 cm (5
feet)
Female:
45.5 kg + 2.3 kg for each 2.54
cm (1 inch) over 152 cm (5 feet)
Lean body mass Male:
1.1 × TBW – 128 × (TBW/Ht)2
Female:
1.07 × TBW – 148 × (TBW/
Ht)2
Fat-free mass19 Male:
(9.27 × 103 × TBW)/(6.68 ×
103 + 216 × BMI)
Female:
(9.27 × 103 × TBW)/(8.78 ×
103 + 244 × BMI)
Pharmacokinetic mass20,21 Modified fat-free mass22,23 52/(1 + [196.4 × e−0.025 TBW –
53.66]/100) (fentanyl only)
FFM + 0.4b (TBW − FFM)
aSuperscript numbers in this column indicate references at the end of
the chapter.
bThe dose/kg using IBW, TBW, or FFM in an obese person are all less
than the dose/kg using TBW in a nonobese patient.
BMI, Body mass index; FFM, fat-free mass; Ht, height in centimeters;
IBW, ideal body weight; LBM, lean body mass; MFFM, modified fat-free
mass; TBW, total body weight in kg.
Table 4.2 Dosing Weights Based on Various Dosing Scalars
Dosing Weight, 176-cm
(6-foot)- Tall Male
Dosing Scalar
68 kg
BMI = 22
185 kg
BMI = 60
Total body weight (TBW) 68 185
Ideal body weight (IBW) 72 72
Lean body mass (LBM) 56 62
Fat-free mass (FFM) 55 88
Modified fat-free mass (MFFM) 60 127
BMI, Body mass index (kg/m2).
is required for normal-size patients. These scaled weights
are usually smaller than TBW in obese patients and thus
help prevent excessive drug administration (Fig. 4.25).
Scaled weights have been used in place of TBW for both
bolus (mg/kg) and infusion (mg/kg/hr) dosing and also
for target-controlled infusions (TCIs).
This section will discuss the pharmacologic altera-
tions of select intravenous anesthetic drugs (propofol,
48
140
LBM
IBW
CBW
TBW
FFM
Scale body weight (kg)
120
100
80
60
40
40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
Total body weight (kg)
Fig. 4.25 Scaled weights as a function of total body weight
(TBW). Key points in this plot: IBW remains the same regard-
less of the TBW, and LBM starts to decline for weight increases
above 127 kg. CBW, Corrected body weight; FFM, fat-free mass;
IBW, ideal body weight; LBM, lean body mass (for a 40-year-old
man, 176 cm tall). (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al,
eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier;
2015:Fig. 24.31.)
remifentanil, and fentanyl) in obese patients, including
shortcomings of weight scalars when used in bolus and
continuous infusion dosing.
Propofol
The influence of obesity on propofol pharmacokinetics
is not entirely clear (also see Chapter 8). Generally, in
obese patients, the blood distributes more to nonadipose
than to adipose tissues, resulting in higher plasma drug
concentrations in obese patients with mg/kg dosing than
in normal patients with less adipose mass. Furthermore,
propofol clearance increases because of the increased
liver volume and liver blood flow associated with obe-
sity (and increased cardiac output). Changes to volumes
of distribution likely influence concentration peaks with
bolus dosing, whereas changes in clearance likely influ-
ence concentrations during and following infusions.
Various weight scalars in propofol bolus and continuous
infusion dosing have been studied.
Dosing Scalars for Propofol
Simulations of an infusion using various weight sca-
lars are presented in Fig. 4.26. The simulations predict
propofol effect-site concentrations from a 60-minute
infusion (167 µg/kg/min) in a 176-cm (6-foot)-tall obese
(185 kg) and lean (68 kg) male patient. If dosed accord-
ing to TBW, peak plasma concentrations in the lean
and obese individuals are different. The other weight
scalars lead to much smaller concentrations with the
infusion.
Propofol effect-site concentration (ng/mL)
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
TBW (lean)
TBW (obese)
CBW (obese)
LBM (obese)
IBW (obese)
FFM (obese)
0 15 30 45 60 75 90
Time (min)
Fig. 4.26 Simulations of propofol plasma concentrations that
result from a 60-minute infusion (10 mg/kg/h [167 µg/kg/min])
to a 40-year-old man who is 176 cm tall. Simulations include the
following dosing weights: total body weights (TBW) of 68 kg and
185 kg (body mass indices of 22 and 60, respectively) and scaled
weights for the 185-kg weight to include Servin’s corrected body
weight (CBW), lean body mass (LBM), ideal body weight (IBW),
and fat-free mass (FFM). Key points: At the 185-kg weight, when
dosed to TBW, the infusion leads to high propofol concentrations,
whereas when dosed to IBW or LBM, the infusion leads to low
propofol concentrations. When the 185-kg individual is dosed
using CBW, it best approximates the propofol concentrations that
result from TBW in a lean individual. (From Miller RD, Cohen NH,
Eriksson LI, et al, eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadelphia:
Saunders Elsevier; 2014:Fig. 24.32.)
Of the many available dosing scalars, authors rec-
ommend LBM24 for bolus dosing (i.e., during induction)
and TBW or corrected body weight (CBW) for infu-
sions.17,25 For continuous infusions, other weight scalars
are likely to result in inadequate dosing (most worri-
some for LBM).
One concern with using TBW to dose continuous infu-
sions (i.e., µg/kg/min) is drug accumulation. Prior investi-
gations, however, do not support this assumption. Servin
and colleagues22 performed pharmacokinetic analyses
of propofol administration to normal and obese patients
using TBW and CBW. The CBW was defined as the IBW +
0.4 × (TBW − IBW).24 They found similar concentrations
at eye opening in both groups and absence of propofol
accumulation in obese patients. However, some reports
suggest that dosing infusions according to CBW may
underdose morbidly obese patients.25
Other Sedatives
Only limited information is available on the behavior
of other sedatives (i.e., midazolam, ketamine, etomidate,
and barbiturates) in obese patients (also see Chapter 8).
Although not clinically validated in obese patients,
bolus doses probably should be based on TBW, and use
of other dosing scalars will lead to inadequate effect. In
␣
Chapter 4 Basic Pharmacologic Principles
contrast, continuous infusion rates should be dosed to
IBW.26
Opioids
Remifentanil
In obese patients, largely owing to its rapid metabolism
by nonspecific esterases, the distribution volume and
clearance of remifentanil are similar in lean and obese
patients.27 As with propofol, researchers have explored
several scaled weights in an effort to optimize bolus dos-
ing, continuous infusions, and TCIs.
Dosing Scalars
As described with propofol, simulation is used to pre-
dict remifentanil effect-site concentrations and analgesic
effect for a variety of scaled weights in a 174-cm-tall
obese (185 kg, BMI of 60) individual and lean (68 kg,
BMI of 22) individual (Fig. 4.27). Several key points are
illustrated in these simulations:
1. For an obese patient, dosing scaled to FFM or IBW
resulted in almost identical remifentanil effect-site
concentrations as in the lean patient dosed according
to TBW. Unlike propofol, dosing remifentanil to CBW
(red line, Fig. 4.27A) leads to higher plasma concen-
trations compared to levels achieved when dosing to
TBW in a lean individual.
2. Dosing scaled to LBM in the obese individual resulted
in lower effect-site concentrations than those in a lean
individual dosed according to TBW.
3. Dosing the obese individual to TBW was excessive.
4. All dosing scalars, except LBM, provided effect-site
concentrations associated with a high probability of
analgesia.
As can be appreciated in Fig. 4.27, LBM has substantial
shortcomings in morbidly obese patients.29 First, dosing
remifentanil to LBM leads to plasma concentrations with
a low probability of effect compared to the other dosing
scalars. Second, with excessive weight (BMI over 40), LBM
actually becomes smaller with increasing TBW, making it
impractical to use (see Fig. 4.25). A modified LBM,24 FFM
eliminates the extremely low dosing weight problem.30
In this simulation, IBW also provides suitable effect-site
concentrations, but this may not always be the case when
using a weight scalar that is based only on patient height.␣
Fentanyl
Despite widespread use in the clinical arena, relatively
little work has explored how obesity affects fentanyl
pharmacokinetics (also see Chapter 9). Published fen-
tanyl pharmacokinetic models31,32 tend to overestimate
fentanyl concentrations as TBW increases.22 Investiga-
tors have20,21 explored ways to improve predictions using
published models by modifying demographic data (e.g.,
either height or weight). Recommendations include use
of a modified weight, called the pharmacokinetic mass to
␣
49 49
II
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Remifentanil effect-site
concentration (ng/mL)
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
100
TBW (lean)
TBW (obese)
CBW (obese)
LBM (obese)
IBW (obese)
FFM (obese)
Probability of analgesia
80
60
TBW (lean)
TBW (obese)
CBW (obese)
LBM (obese)
IBW (obese)
FFM (obese)
40
20
0
B
0 15 30 45 60 75 90
0 20 40 60 80 100
A Time (min)
Time (min)
Fig. 4.27 Simulations of remifentanil effect-site concentrations (A) and analgesic effect (B) that result
from a 1-µg/kg bolus and a 60-minute infusion at a rate of 0.15 µg/kg/min to a 40-year-old man who
is 176-cm tall. Simulations include the following dosing weights: total body weights (TBW) of 68 kg and
185 kg (body mass indices of 22 and 60, respectively) and scaled weights for the 185-kg weight to include
Servin’s corrected body weight (CBW), lean body mass (LBM), ideal body weight (IBW), and fat-free mass
(FFM). Remifentanil effect-site concentrations and estimates of analgesic effect were estimated using
published pharmacokinetic models.6,28 Analgesia was defined as loss of response to 30 psi of pressure on
the anterior tibia. (From Miller RD, Cohen NH, Eriksson LI, et al, eds. Miller’s Anesthesia. 8th ed. Philadel-
phia: Saunders Elsevier; 2015:Fig. 24.34.)
improve the predictive performance of one of the many
available fentanyl kinetic models.␣
Other Opioids
Even less information regarding the impact of obesity on
drug behavior is available for opioids other than remifen-
tanil and fentanyl. Researchers have studied sufentanil in
obese patients and found that its volume of distribution
increases linearly with TBW33 and clearance was simi-
lar between lean and obese individuals. They recommend
bolus dosing using TBW and “prudently reduced” dosing
for continuous infusions.␣
Inhaled Anesthetics
A widely held perception of volatile anesthetics (also see
Chapter 7) is that they accumulate more in obese than
in lean patients and that this leads to prolonged emer-
gence. This concept, however, has not been confirmed.34
Two phenomena contribute to this observation: first,
blood flow to adipose tissue decreases with increasing
obesity,35 and second, the time required to fill adipose
tissue with volatile anesthetics is long.␣
Influence of Increasing Age on Anesthetic
Drug Pharmacology
Age is one of the most valuable covariates to consider
when developing an anesthetic plan (also see Chapter 35).
As with obesity, both remifentanil and propofol can serve
as prototypes to understand how age influences anesthetic
drug behavior. The influence of age on remifentanil and
propofol are characterized in quantitative terms.1,6,7,36
With remifentanil, elderly patients require less drug
to produce an opioid effect. The effectiveness of reduced
doses in older patients is primarily a function of changes
in pharmacodynamics but may involve pharmacokinetic
changes as well.6 Based on previously published pharma-
cokinetic and pharmacodynamic models built from mea-
surements over a wide age range,1,6,7,36 simulations can be
performed to explore how age may influence dosing. For
example, to achieve equipotent doses in 20- and 80-year-
olds, the dose for the 80-year-old should be reduced by
55%. A similar analysis for propofol recommends that
the dose for an 80-year-old should be reduced by 65%
compared to that of a 20-year-old.
The mechanisms for these changes are not clear,
especially for pharmacodynamic changes. One possible
source of change in pharmacokinetic behavior may be
due to decreased cardiac output. Decreased cardiac out-
put in the elderly27 results in slower circulation and drug
mixing. This may lead to high peak concentrations27,37
and decreased drug delivery to metabolic organs and
reduced clearance. Many intravenous anesthetics (pro-
pofol, thiopental, and etomidate) have slower clear-
ance and a smaller volume of distribution.1,38-40 in the
elderly. Beyond age-related changes in cardiac output,
other comorbid conditions may reduce cardiovascular
function as well.41 Taking this into account, anesthesia
50
Chapter 4 Basic Pharmacologic Principles
providers often consider a patient’s “physiologic” age
instead of solely relying on chronologic age.42,43 For
some older patients, such as those with no significant
coexisting disease, normal body habitus, and good exer-
cise tolerance, a substantial reduction in dose may not
be warranted.␣
anesthesia providers, given that they rarely use just
one drug when providing an anesthetic.␣
QUESTIONS OF THE DAY
SUMMARY
This chapter reviewed basic principles of clinical phar-
macology used to describe anesthetic drug behavior:
pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and anesthetic
drug interactions. These principles provide anesthe-
sia practitioners with the information needed to make
rational decisions about the selection and adminis-
tration of anesthetics. From a practical aspect, these
principles characterize the magnitude and time course
of drug effect, but because of complex mathematics,
they have limited clinical utility in everyday prac-
tice. Advances in computer simulation, however, have
brought this capability to the point of real-time patient
care. Perhaps one of the most important advances
in our understanding of clinical pharmacology is
the development of interaction models that describe
how different classes of anesthetic drugs influence
one another. This knowledge is especially relevant to
1. In a multicompartment pharmacokinetic model (e.g.,
for fentanyl bolus administration), what are the three
phases that can be distinguished?
2. How can a decrement time be used to compare drugs
within a drug class? What is the definition of context-
sensitive half-time? How does terminal elimination
half-life differ from context-sensitive half-time?
3. What is the definition of biophase? What is the utility
of an effect site compartment in describing anesthetic
drug pharmacology?
4. What is the difference between antagonistic, additive,
and synergistic anesthetic drug interactions? What is
an isobole, and how can it be used to determine an
appropriate anesthetic regimen?
5. How does obesity influence propofol pharmacokinet-
ics? What weight scalar should be used for propofol
bolus dose versus propofol infusion dose?
6. How does age influence the pharmacology of remifen-
tanil? What are the mechanisms of these age-related
changes?
REFERENCES
1. Schnider TW, Minto CF, Gambus PL,
et al. The influence of method of ad-
ministration and covariates on the
pharmacokinetics of propofol in adult
volunteers. Anesthesiology. 1998;88(5):
1170–1182.
2. Wilkinson GR, Shand DG. Commen-
tary: a physiological approach to he-
patic drug clearance. Clin Pharmacol
Ther. 1975;18:377–390.
3. Krejcie TC, Avram MJ, Gentry WB, et al.
A recirculatory model of the pulmonary
uptake and pharmacokinetics of lido-
caine based on analysis or arterial and
mixed venous data from dogs. J Phar-
macokinet Biopharm. 1997;25:169–190.
4. Youngs EJ, Shafer SL. Basic phar-
macokinetic and pharmacodynamic
principles. In: White PF, ed. Textbook
of Intravenous Anesthesia. Baltimore:
Williams & Wilkins; 1997.
5. Hughes MA, Glass PS, Jacobs JR.
Context-sensitive half-time in multi-
compartment pharmacokinetic models
for intravenous anesthetic drugs. Anes-
thesiology. 1992;76(3):334–341.
6. Minto CF, Schnider TW, Egan TD,
et al. Influence of age and gender on
the pharmacokinetics and pharmaco-
dynamics of remifentanil. I. Model
development. Anesthesiology. 1997;
86(1):10–23.
7. Schnider TW, Minto CF, Shafer SL,
et al. The influence of age on propo-
fol pharmacodynamics. Anesthesiology.
1999;90(6):1502–1516.
8. Lee S, Kim BH, Lim K, et al. Phar-
macokinetics and pharmacodynamics
of intravenous dexmedetomidine in
healthy Korean subjects. J Clin Pharm
Ther. 2012;37:698–703.
9. Hudson RJ, Bergstrom RG, Thomson IR,
et al. Pharmacokinetics of sufentanil in
patients undergoing abdominal aortic
surgery. Anesthesiology. 1989;70:426–
431.
10. Scott JC, Stanski DR. Decreased fenta-
nyl and alfentanil dose requirements
with age. A simultaneous pharmacoki-
netic and pharmacodynamic evaluation.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1987;240(1):
159–166.
11. Doufas AG, Bakhshandeh M, Bjorksten
AR, et al. Induction speed is not a deter-
minant of propofol pharmacodynamics.
Anesthesiology. 2004;101:1112–1121.
12. Egan TD, Muir KT, Hermann DJ, et al.
The electroencephalogram (EEG) and
clinical measures of opioid potency:
defining the EEG-clinical potency re-
lationship (“fingerprint”) with applica-
tion to remifentanil. Int J Pharm Med.
2001;15(1):11–19.
13. Bouillon TW, Bruhn J, Radulescu L, et al.
Pharmacodynamic interaction between
propofol and remifentanil regarding
hypnosis, tolerance of laryngoscopy,
bispectral index, and electroencephalo-
graphic approximate entropy. Anesthe-
siology. 2004;100(6):1353–1372.
14. Heyse B, Proost JH, Schumacher PM,
et al. Sevoflurane remifentanil inter-
action: comparison of different re-
sponse surface models. Anesthesiology.
2012;116(2):311–323.
15. Kern SE, Xie G, White JL, Egan TD. A
response surface analysis of propofol-
remifentanil pharmacodynamic inter-
action in volunteers. Anesthesiology.
2004;100(6):1373–1381.
16. Manyam SC, Gupta DK, Johnson KB,
et al. Opioid-volatile anesthetic synergy:
a response surface model with remifen-
tanil and sevoflurane as prototypes.
Anesthesiology. 2006;105(2):267–278.
17. Mertens MJ, Engbers FH, Burm AG,
Vuyk J. Predictive performance of
computer-controlled infusion of remifen-
tanil during propofol/remifentanil anaes-
thesia. Br J Anaesth. 2003;90(2):132–141.
51 51
II
Chapter 19 Patient Positioning and Associated Risks
A
III
C
B
D
Fig. 19.4 (A) Prone position with Wilson frame. Arms are abducted less than 90 degrees whenever possible.
Pressure points are padded, and chest and abdomen are supported away from the bed to minimize abdomi-
nal pressure and preserve pulmonary compliance. Foam head pillow has cutouts for eyes and nose and a
slot to permit the endotracheal tube to exit. Eyes must be checked frequently. (B) Mirror system for prone
position. Bony structures of the head and face are supported, and monitoring of eyes and airway is facilitated
with a plastic mirror. (C) Prone position with horseshoe adapter. Head height is adjusted to position neck in
a neutral position. (D) Prone position, face seen from below. Horseshoe adapter permits superior access to
airway and visualization of eyes. Width may be adjusted to ensure proper support by facial bones.
327 327
Section II PHARMACOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY
18. LaPierre CD, Johnson KB, Randall BR,
et al. An exploration of remifentanil-
propofol combinations that lead to a
loss of response to esophageal instru-
mentation, a loss of responsiveness,
and/or onset of intolerable ventila-
tory depression. Anesth Analg. 2011;
113(3):490–499.
19. Janmahasatian S, Duffull SB, Ash S, et al.
Quantification of lean bodyweight. Clin
Pharmacokinet. 2005;44(10):1051–1065.
20. Shibutani K, Inchiosa Jr MA, Sawada K,
Bairamian M. Accuracy of pharmacoki-
netic models for predicting plasma fen-
tanyl concentrations in lean and obese
surgical patients: derivation of dosing
weight (“pharmacokinetic mass”). An-
esthesiology. 2004;101(3):603–613.
21. Shibutani K, Inchiosa Jr MA, Sawada K,
Bairamian M. Pharmacokinetic mass of
fentanyl for postoperative analgesia in
lean and obese patients. Br J Anaesth.
2005;95(3):377–383.
22. Servin F, Farinotti R, Haberer JP, Des-
monts JM. Propofol infusion for main-
tenance of anesthesia in morbidly
obese patients receiving nitrous oxide.
A clinical and pharmacoki netic study.
Anesthesiology. 1993;78(4):657–665.
23. Cortinez LI, Anderson BJ, Penna A,
et al. Influence of obesity on propo-
fol pharmacokinetics: derivation of a
pharmacokinetic model. Br J Anaesth.
2010;105(4):448–456.
24. Albertin A, Poli D, La Colla L, et al.
Predictive performance of “Servin’s
formula” during BIS-guided propofol-
remifentanil target-controlled infu-
sion in morbidly obese patients. Br J
Anaesth. 2007;98(1):66–75.
25. Igarashi T, Nagata O, Iwakiri H, et al.
[Two cases of intraoperative awareness
during intravenous anesthesia with
propofol in morbidly obese patients].
Masui. 2002;51(11):1243–1247.
26. Greenblatt DJ, Abernethy DR, Locniskar
A, et al. Effect of age, gender, and obe-
sity on midazolam kinetics. Anesthesiol-
ogy. 1984;61(1):27–35.
27. Upton RN, Ludbrook GL, Grant C,
Martinez AM. Cardiac output is a deter-
minant of the initial concentrations of
propofol after short-infusion administra-
tion. Anesth Analg. 1999;89(3):545–552.
28. Johnson KB, Syroid ND, Gupta DK, et al.
An evaluation of remifentanil propofol
response surfaces for loss of respon-
siveness, loss of response to surrogates
of painful stimuli and laryngoscopy in
patients undergoing elective surgery.
Anesth Analg. 2008;106(2):471–479.
29. La Colla L, Albertin A, La Colla G,
et al. No adjustment vs. adjustment
formula as input weight for propofol
target-controlled infusion in morbidly
obese patients. Eur J Anaesthesiol.
2009;26(5):362–369.
30. La Colla L, Albertin A, La Colla G, et al.
Predictive performance of the “Minto”
remifentanil pharmacokinetic parame-
ter set in morbidly obese patients ensu-
ing from a new method for calculating
lean body mass. Clin Pharmacokinet.
2010;49(2):131–139.
31. Anderson BJ, Holford NH. Mechanistic
basis of using body size and maturation
to predict clearance in humans. Drug
Metab Pharmacokinet. 2009;24(1):25–36.
32. Duffull SB, Dooley MJ, Green B, et al.
A standard weight descriptor for dose
adjustment in the obese patient. Clin
Pharmacokinet. 2004;43(16):1167–
1178.
33. Schwartz AE, Matteo RS, Ornstein E,
et al. Pharmacokinetics of sufentanil
in obese patients. Anesth Analg. 1991;
73(6):790–793.
34. Cortinez LI, Gambús P, Trocóniz IF, et al.
Obesity does not influence the onset and
offset of sevoflurane effect as measured
52
by the hysteresis between sevoflurane
concentration and bispectral index.
Anesth Analg. 2011;113(1):70–76.
35. Lesser GT, Deutsch S. Measurement of
adipose tissue blood flow and perfu-
sion in man by uptake of 85Kr. J Appl
Physiol. 1967;23(5):621–630.
36. Minto CF, Schnider TW, Shafer SL. Phar-
macokinetics and pharmacodynamics of
remifentanil. II. Model application. Anes-
thesiology. 1997;86(1):24–33.
37. Krejcie TC, Avram MJ. What deter-
mines anesthetic induction dose? It’s
the front-end kinetics, doctor! Anesth
Analg. 1999;89(3):541–544.
38. Arden JR, Holley FO, Stanski DR. In-
creased sensitivity to etomidate in the
elderly: initial distribution versus al-
tered brain response. Anesthesiology.
1986;65(1):19–27.
39. Homer TD, Stanski DR. The effect of in-
creasing age on thiopental disposition
and anesthetic requirement. Anesthesi-
ology. 1985;62:714–724.
40. Stanski DR, Maitre PO. Population phar-
macokinetics and pharmacodynamics
of thiopental: the effect of age revisited.
Anesthesiology. 1990;72(3):412–422.
41. Rodeheffer RJ, Gerstenblith G, Becker LC,
et al. Exercise cardiac output is main-
tained with advancing age in healthy
human subjects: cardiac dilatation and
increased stroke volume compensate
for a diminished heart rate. Circulation.
1984;69(2):203–213.
42. Avram MJ, Krejcie TC, Henthorn TK.
The relationship of age to the pharma-
cokinetics of early drug distribution:
the concurrent disposition of thiopental
and indocyanine green. Anesthesiology.
1990;72(3):403–411.
43. Williams TF. Aging or disease? Clin
Pharmacol Ther. 1987;42(6):663–665.
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
A
prone position serve to minimize abdominal compression.
To prevent tissue injury, pendulous structures (e.g., male
genitalia and female breasts) should be clear of compres-
sion; the breasts should be placed medial to the bolsters.
The lower portion of each roll or bolster must be placed
under its respective iliac crest to prevent pressure injury
to the genitalia and the femoral vasculature.
Similar to the supine position, hemodynamics are well
maintained, and pulmonary function is actually supe-
rior to the supine position. The FRC is actually improved
compared to the supine positioning, leading to improved
oxygenation. For obese patients, pulmonary compliance
is improved in the prone position with the abdomen
hanging freely (also see Chapter 29). The prone position
has been utilized to improve respiratory function and
mortality rate in patients with adult respiratory distress
syndrome.7
Proper prone positioning of patients relies on the table
and headrest equipment. Horseshoe and rigid fixation pin
headrests attach to adjustable articulating supports; any
slippage or failure of this bracketing device may lead to
complications if the head suddenly drops. Jackson tables
can actually tilt or flip 180 degrees as a result of disen-
gagement of the turning locking mechanisms.␣
Sitting
B
Fig. 19.5 (A) Sitting position with Mayfield head pins. The patient
is typically semirecumbent rather than sitting as the legs are kept
as high as possible to promote venous return. Arms must be sup-
ported to prevent shoulder traction. Note that the head holder
support is preferably attached to the back section rather than the
thigh section of the table so that the patient’s back may be ad-
justed or lowered emergently without first detaching the head
holder. (B) Sitting position adapted for shoulder surgery. Note the
absence of pressure over the ulnar area of the elbow.
The abdomen should hang relatively freely for patients
in the prone position. This alleviates external pressure on
the abdomen, which can otherwise cause problems with
ventilation and hypotension by compressing the inferior
vena cava and reducing venous return. The thorax should
be supported by firm rolls or bolsters placed along each
side from the clavicle to the iliac crest. Multiple commer-
cial rolls and bolsters are available including the Wilson
frame (Fig. 19.4A), Jackson table, Relton frame, and the
Mouradian/Simmons modification of the Relton frame.
All devices and special operating room tables for the
In the sitting position (Fig. 19.5B) the patient’s head and
also the operative field are located above the level of
the heart. Sitting position can provide excellent surgical
exposure for some cervical spine and neurosurgical pro-
cedures, particularly of the posterior fossa and superior
cervical spine. Blood loss may also be reduced owing to
decreased venous pressure in the operative field.8 A vari-
ation of the sitting position, the “beach chair” position,
has been increasingly used for shoulder surgeries includ-
ing arthroscopic procedures. This position offers access to
the shoulder from both the anterior and posterior aspect,
and potential for great mobility of the arm at the shoulder
joint.
In the sitting position, the patient’s head must be ade-
quately fixed. This can be done either with a head strap,
tape, or rigid fixation. The arms should be supported and
padded. The anesthesia provider should ensure that the
shoulders are even or very mildly elevated in order to
avoid stretch injury between the neck and shoulders. The
knees are usually slightly flexed for balance and to reduce
stretching of the sciatic nerve, and the feet are also sup-
ported and padded.
The most significant complication from the sitting
position is risk of venous air embolism (VAE). During
intracranial procedures, a significant amount of air can
be entrained through the open dural venous sinuses. Low
venous pressure in the operative field creates a gradi-
ent for air entry into the venous system, similar to the
risk of venous air entry during central line placement.
328
The important fear is the occurrence of a paradoxical
air embolism. Patients undergoing planned surgery in
the sitting position should be first evaluated to rule-out
anatomic intracardiac shunts. If an intracardiac shunt is
present, even small amounts of entrained venous air may
result in a stroke or myocardial infarction. Transesopha-
geal echocardiography (TEE) has shown some degree of
venous air in most patients undergoing neurosurgery
in the sitting position even as high as 100%. Clinically
significant VAE has a much smaller incidence of 0.5%
to 3%.8,9 Currently TEE is the gold standard for detec-
tion of intracardiac shunts. Even with screening, con-
trast echocardiography septal patency may not always
be detected. A recent meta-analysis assessing accuracy
of TEE for detection of intracardiac shunts compared
to autopsy, cardiac catheterization, or surgery found a
sensitivity of 89% and specificity of 91% for TEE. Other
means of evaluating for intracardiac shunts include
transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) and transcranial
Doppler (TCD). Recent studies comparing TTE or TCD to
TEE reveal sensitivities and specificities of 46% and 99%
for TTE and 97% and 93% for TCD, respectively.9-12 Other
complications of VAE include arrhythmias, acute pulmo-
nary hypertension, and circulatory collapse. Preoperative
diagnosis of an intracardiac shunt is a contraindication
to surgery in the sitting position. With adequate intra-
vascular volume, the use of intraoperative TEE or pre-
cordial Doppler ultrasound may aid in early detection of
entrained air.13
Patients are at risk for hypotension from pooling
of blood in the lower body. The lower extremities are
often wrapped in Ace bandages or compression stock-
ings. Intravenous fluids and vasopressors are usually
required in order to raise mean arterial pressure. Inva-
sive arterial blood pressure monitoring is recommended
for these cases and should be measured at the level of
the external auditory meatus in order to optimize cere-
bral perfusion pressure. Central venous catheter (CVC)
access is also recommended for these cases. Long-arm
CVCs provide intravenous access without being near
the surgical field. Multiorifice CVCs offer an advantage
over conventional CVCs for improved aspiration of air
should a VAE occur.
Pneumocephalus occurs in almost all patients under-
going cervical spine or posterior fossa surgery in the
sitting position if diagnosed on postoperative imaging.
Clinically significant pneumocephalus is more rare and
occurs because of the lower pressure of cerebrospinal
fluid in the sitting position. Symptomatic patients may
experience headache, confusion, seizures, or even tem-
porary hemiparesis. Patients experiencing any of these
symptoms need to also be evaluated to rule out other
postoperative complications, such as intravascular bleed-
ing or stroke. Complications from head and neck posi-
tioning are also a risk of the sitting position. Excessive
flexion of the cervical spine can impede cerebral venous
Chapter 19 Patient Positioning and Associated Risks
outflow contributing to swelling and can also impede
cerebral arterial inflow causing hypoperfusion of the
brain. Macroglossia can also occur with excessive neck
flexion. TEE monitoring combined with neck flexion can
cause compression of laryngeal structures and the tongue.
A minimum distance of two fingerbreadths between the
mandible and the sternum is recommended for a normal-
sized adult in order to prevent these complications. If
preoperative examination reveals that the patient has a
further decreased range of motion, then intraoperative
positioning should not extend beyond the patient’s nor-
mal limitations.14
␣
POSITIONING FOR ROBOTIC SURGERY
Robotic surgery came into use around 1999 and has
quickly become the norm for many urologic operations
as well as in gynecologic surgery where it is also dra-
matically increasing.12,13,15,16 For surgeons, robotic sur-
gery offers advantages regarding range of motion and
accuracy of laparoscopic instrumentation. However,
robotic surgery does introduce some new positioning
challenges. Robotic surgery is generally performed with
the patient in steep Trendelenburg (30 to 45 degrees)
and lithotomy with arms tucked in neutral position
bilaterally to the sides. The patient must be very well
secured in order to avoid slipping in steep Trendelen-
burg position.
Many medical institutions use a nonslip mattress (such
as a bean bag and foam) on the bed. In order to better
secure the patient, the chest straps are placed in an X con-
figuration over the chest. Use of shoulder braces can also
help, although there are case reports of brachial plexus
injuries because of stretch between the shoulder and neck.
If shoulder braces are employed, monitor for excessive
stretch at the patient’s neck. The endotracheal tube should
be well secured to avoid migration. Often a metal tray or
table is placed above the patient’s face in order to provide
protection from laparoscopic equipment.14-19
Once the robot is docked, direct access to the patient
is limited. The anesthesia provider should place all moni-
tors, intravenous lines, and invasive lines that might be
required during the case prior to docking the robot. It
is prudent to perform a test by placing the patient in
steep Trendelenburg position prior to docking the robot
to ensure that the patient is properly positioned and
does not slip, and to ensure that the patient can toler-
ate steep Trendelenburg positioning from a physiologic
standpoint.
Physiologic changes during robotic surgery are due
to both laparoscopic insufflation as well as the steep
Trendelenburg positioning. Hemodynamic changes
are largely due to laparoscopic insufflation, whereas
changes in respiratory mechanics are also affected
by positioning. FRC decreases with laparoscopy and
329 329
III
Section III PREOPERATIVE PREPARATION AND INTRAOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT
the addition of steep Trendelenburg, which further
decreases it. This is due to the combination of pressures
of abdominal contents from laparoscopy and Tren-
delenburg pushing up on the diaphragm. It can also be
worsened by chest fixation that is applied to prevent
the patient from slipping off the table. Peak and pla-
teau airway pressures have been shown to rise as much
as 50%. Between changes in pulmonary compliance,
decreased FRC, and the need for increased minute ven-
tilation with carbon dioxide insufflation, intraopera-
tive mechanical ventilation can be quite challenging
during these cases.14-20
Other complications from robotic laparoscopic surger-
ies include laryngeal edema and optic neuropathy. Con-
sider checking for airway leak at the start and at the end
of the surgical procedure prior to extubation.␣
muscle, which has been implicated in tongue, lip, and
even tooth injuries because of biting motion. A retro-
spective review of over 17,000 cases employing Tc-MEPs
found an overall incidence of 0.14% and the tongue was
most frequently injured (∼80% of all associated inju-
ries).19,22 Severity of injury ranged from minor bruising
to the necessity of laceration repair by suture in 25 of
111 patients. Some medical institutions use bite blocks
between the right and left molars (“double-bite blocks”)
for these cases in order to prevent these injuries. Even
so, approximately 50% of injured patients did have dou-
ble-bite blocks in place. There are commercial devices
available, but they often are of questionable additional
benefit.␣
PERIPHERAL NERVE INJURIES
PRESSURE INJURIES
Pressure injuries are due to prolonged pressure that
inhibits capillary blood flow over a bony prominence. In
animal models, damage has been shown to start within
2 hours with 70 mm Hg force. Classification of pres-
sure ulcers is according to the consensus panel from the
National Pressure Sore Advisory Panel. Stages range
from intact, nonblanchable erythema (stage 1) to full-
thickness tissue loss (stage 4). Muscle damage occurs
before skin and subcutaneous tissue damage and is likely
due to increased oxygen requirements of muscle. In the
supine position, areas most at risk include the sacrum,
heels, and occiput. In the prone position, the chest and
knees are at the most frequent risk for pressure injury
and in the sitting position, the ischial tuberosities are at
the most frequent risk.18,21
Most intraoperative pressure injuries (>80%) are dis-
covered within 72 hours of surgery and occur most often
in operations lasting more than 3 hours. The longer the
surgery the higher the incidence of pressure injury. Car-
diac, thoracic, orthopedic, and vascular patients had the
highest incidences.
Aside from pressure injuries over bony prominences,
pressure injuries in the lips, tongue, and nasal alae can
occur from endotracheal tubes, nasogastric tubes, and
other medical devices. One should ensure that pressure
from medical devices is minimized. This is particularly
important during hypotension or hypothermia when the
tissue is more vulnerable to pressure-induced injuries.␣
BITE INJURIES
Transcranial motor-evoked potentials (Tc-MEPs) are
becoming more commonly used for both spine surgi-
cal procedures and neurosurgical procedures. Tc-MEPs
involve contraction of the temporalis and masseter
Peripheral nerve injury remains a serious perioperative
complication and a significant source of professional lia-
bility despite its low incidence. The incidence of periph-
eral nerve injury is between 0.03% to 0.11%, according to
the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Closed
Claims Project database. Peripheral nerve injuries repre-
sented 22% of all claims. Injuries occur when peripheral
nerves are subjected to compression, stretch, ischemia,
metabolic derangement, and direct trauma/laceration
during surgery.23 Because sensation is blocked by uncon-
sciousness or regional anesthesia, early warning symp-
toms of pain with normal spontaneous repositioning are
absent.1,20,24
Peripheral nerve injury is a complex phenomenon
with a multifactorial cause. The ASA released an updated
practice advisory in 2010 to help prevent periopera-
tive neuropathies (Box 19.1). Ulnar neuropathy is the
most common lesion representing 28% of all peripheral
nerve injury claims, followed by injury to the brachial
plexus (20%), lumbosacral nerve root (16%), and spinal
cord (13%) (Table 19.1). Interestingly the distribution of
nerve injury claims has changed over time. Ulnar neu-
ropathy decreased from 37% in 1980 to 1984 to 17% in
the 1990s, and spinal cord injury increased from 8% in
1980 to 1984 to 27% in the 1990s. Spinal cord injury and
lumbosacral nerve root neuropathy were predominantly
associated with regional anesthesia. Epidural hematoma
and chemical injury represented 29% of the known
mechanisms of injury among the claims filed. The inju-
ries were probably related to the use of neuraxial block in
patients who are receiving anticoagulation drugs and the
increased usage of blocks for chronic pain management
(Table 19.2).1,21,25,26
There is no direct evidence that positioning or pad-
ding alone can prevent perioperative neuropathies.
Most injuries, particularly injuries to nerves of the upper
extremity such as the ulnar nerve and brachial plexus,
occurred in the presence of adequate positioning and
330
Chapter 19 Patient Positioning and Associated Risks
Box 19.1 An Updated Report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Prevention of Perioperative
Peripheral Neuropathies
I. Preoperative History and Physical Assessment
• When judged appropriate, it is helpful to ascertain that
patients can comfortably tolerate the anticipated operative
position.
• Body habitus, preexisting neurologic symptoms, diabetes
mellitus, peripheral vascular disease, alcohol dependency,
arthritis, and gender (e.g., male gender and its association
with ulnar neuropathy) are important elements of a preop-
erative history.␣
II. Positioning Strategies for the Upper Extremities
• Arm abduction in supine patients should be limited to 90
degrees. Patients who are positioned prone may comfortably
tolerate arm abduction greater than 90 degrees.
• Supine Patient With Arm on an Arm Board: The upper ex-
tremity should be positioned to decrease pressure on the
postcondylar groove of the humerus (ulnar groove). Either
supination or the neutral forearm positions facilitates this
action.
• Supine Patient With Arms Tucked at Side: The forearm
should be in a neutral position. Flexion of the elbow may
increase the risk of ulnar neuropathy, but there is no
consensus on an acceptable degree of flexion during the
perioperative period. Prolonged pressure on the radial
nerve in the spiral groove of the humerus should be
avoided. Extension of the elbow beyond the range that
is comfortable during the preoperative assessment may
stretch the median nerve. Periodic perioperative assess-
ments may ensure maintenance of the desired position.␣
III. Specific Positioning Strategies for the Lower
Extremities
• Stretching of the Hamstring Muscle Group: Positions that
stretch the hamstring muscle group beyond the range that
is comfortable during the preoperative assessment may
stretch the sciatic nerve.
• Limiting Hip Flexion: Because the sciatic nerve or its branches
cross both the hip and the knee joints, extension and flexion
of these joints, respectively, should be considered when
determining the degree of hip flexion. Neither extension nor
flexion of the hip increases the risk of femoral neuropathy.
Prolonged pressure on the peroneal nerve at the fibular head
should be avoided.␣
IV. Protective Padding
• Padded Arm Boards: Padded arm boards may decrease the
risk of upper extremity neuropathy
• Chest Rolls: The use of chest rolls in the laterally positioned
patient may decrease the risk of upper extremity neuropathy.
• Padding at the Elbow: Padding at the elbow may decrease
the risk of upper extremity neuropathy.
• Padding to Protect the Peroneal (Fibular) Nerve: The use
of specific padding to prevent pressure of a hard surface
against the peroneal nerve at the fibular head may decrease
the risk of peroneal neuropathy.
• Complications From the Use of Padding: The inappropriate use
of padding (e.g., padding too tight) may increase the risk of
perioperative neuropathy.␣
V. Equipment
The use of properly functioning automated blood pressure cuffs
on the arm (i.e., placed above the antecubital fossa) does not
change the risk of upper extremity neuropathy. The use of shoul-
der braces in a steep head-down position may increase the risk of
perioperative neuropathies.␣
VI. Postoperative Assessment
A simple postoperative assessment of extremity nerve function
may lead to early recognition of peripheral neuropathies.␣
VII. Documentation
Documentation of specific perioperative positioning actions may
be useful for continuous improvement processes and may result
in improvements by helping practitioners focus attention on rel-
evant aspects of patient positioning and providing information
on positioning strategies that eventually leads to improvements
in patient care.
From American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Prevention of Perioperative Peripheral Neuropathies. Practice advisory for the preven-
tion of perioperative peripheral neuropathies: an updated report by the American Society of Anesthesiologists Task Force on Prevention of Periop-
erative Peripheral Neuropathies. Anesthesiology. 2011;114(4):741-754.
padding. Stretch injuries in peripheral nerves are due
to compromise of the vascular plexus (vasa nervorum)
that runs alongside supplying these nerves. This can
be due to either an obstruction in venous outflow or
an obstruction to arterial inflow. Compression injuries
can manifest in several different ways. Neurapraxia is
caused by a relatively short ischemia time and usually
causes only a transient dysfunction. Axonotmesis is a
demyelinating injury. Neurotmesis is due to a severed
or disrupted nerve and usually deficits are permanent.2
Because the cause of peripheral nerve injuries is often
not clear, identification of modifiable factors for preven-
tion is difficult to ascertain. Generally, maintaining neu-
tral positioning as much as possible is advised. Stretch,
overflexion, and overextension should all be avoided.
Superficial nerves, especially near bony prominences,
should be padded (common peroneal at fibular head,
ulnar nerve at elbow). Padding and support should dis-
tribute weight as evenly as possible. Ensure that equip-
ment (such as laparoscopic equipment, C-arms, and
other x-ray equipment) is never resting directly on the
patient.
In a retrospective study of 1000 consecutive spine sur-
geries that used somatosensory evoked potential (SSEP)
monitoring, five arm positions were compared with
regard to SSEP changes in the upper extremities. A modi-
fication of arm position reversed 92% of upper extremity
SSEP changes. The incidence of position-related upper
331 331
III
nondepolarizing muscle relaxant cause minimal associ-
ated changes in arterial blood pressure or heart rate.
Ketamine is not often used to induce anesthesia for
patients with coronary disease because of the associated
increase in heart rate and systemic arterial blood pressure,
which may increase myocardial oxygen requirements.
When giving desflurane, the inspired concentration
should be slowly increased to avoid sympathetic stimu-
lation and associated tachycardia, pulmonary hyperten-
sion, myocardial ischemia, and bronchospasm.46 Tracheal
intubation is facilitated by the administration of succi-
nylcholine or a nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking
drug (also see Chapter 11).
Myocardial ischemia may accompany the tachycar-
dia and hypertension that result from the stimulation of
direct laryngoscopy as necessary for tracheal intubation.
Adequate anesthesia and a brief duration of direct laryn-
goscopy are important in minimizing the magnitude of
these circulatory changes. When the duration of direct
laryngoscopy is not likely to be brief, or when hyperten-
sion coexists, the addition of other drugs to minimize
the pressor response produced by tracheal intubation
should be considered. For example, laryngotracheal
lidocaine (2 mg/kg) administered just before placing the
tube in the trachea produces rapid topical anesthesia of
the tracheal mucosa and minimizes the magnitude and
duration of the systemic arterial blood pressure increase.
Alternatively, lidocaine (1.5 mg/kg IV), administered
just before initiating direct laryngoscopy, is efficacious
(also see Chapter 16).
Administration of opioids (fentanyl, sufentanil, alfen-
tanil, or remifentanil) before initiating direct laryn-
goscopy reduces the stimulation produced by tracheal
intubation. β-Adrenergic blockers are effective in attenu-
ating heart rate increases associated with tracheal intuba-
tion. Tachycardia should be avoided in all patients with
coronary disease, vascular disease, or risk factors for
coronary disease.␣
Maintenance of Anesthesia
The choice of anesthesia is often based on the patient’s
left ventricular function (see Table 25.3). For example,
patients with CAD but normal left ventricular function
may develop tachycardia and hypertension in response
to intense stimulation. Controlled myocardial depression
produced by a volatile anesthetic with or without nitrous
oxide may be appropriate if the primary goal is to pre-
vent increased myocardial oxygen requirements. Equally
acceptable for maintenance of anesthesia is the use of
a nitrous oxide–opioid technique with the addition of a
volatile anesthetic as necessary to treat acute increases in
systemic arterial blood pressure as produced by a change
in the level of surgical stimulation. When hypertension is
treated with a volatile anesthetic (isoflurane, desflurane,
sevoflurane), the drug-induced decrease in systemic vas-
cular resistance (SVR) is more responsible for decreases
Chapter 25 Cardiovascular Disease
in systemic arterial blood pressure than is drug-induced
myocardial depression. The ability to rapidly increase the
alveolar concentration of sevoflurane makes this drug
uniquely efficacious for treating sudden increases in sys-
temic arterial blood pressure. Abrupt and large increases
in the delivered concentrations of desflurane may be
accompanied by stimulation of the sympathetic nervous
system and transient increases in systemic arterial blood
pressure, heart rate, pulmonary hypertension, and myo-
cardial ischemia51 (also see Chapter 7).
Volatile anesthetics are vasodilators. Under unusual
clinical circumstances, potent coronary vasodilators can
divert blood flow from ischemic areas of myocardium
(blood vessels already fully dilated) to nonischemic areas
of myocardium supplied by vessels capable of vasodi-
lation. Regional myocardial ischemia associated with
drug-induced vasodilation is known as coronary artery
steal. There are reports that the incidence of myocardial
ischemia is either unchanged or increased in patients
with CAD and anesthetized with isoflurane compared
with those receiving a different volatile anesthetic or
an opioid-based anesthetic.47-49 Volatile anesthetics to
varying degrees (halothane, isoflurane, sevoflurane, and
desflurane) induce ischemic preconditioning and may
protect the myocardium from subsequent ischemia.50,51
All facts considered, volatile anesthetics may be either
beneficial in patients with CAD because they decrease
myocardial oxygen requirements and induce ischemic
preconditioning, or detrimental because they decrease
systemic arterial blood pressure and coronary perfu-
sion pressure or produce coronary artery steal (isoflu-
rane) or tachycardia (desflurane).46 A large clinical trial
in patients undergoing cardiac surgery failed to dem-
onstrate a difference between halothane, enflurane,
isoflurane, and narcotic-based anesthetics.52 Avoiding
tachycardia with the use of long-acting β-adrenergic
blockers (metoprolol or atenolol) is more important than
anesthetic choice.16,17,32,33 Intraoperative bolus doses
of short-acting β-adrenergic blockers (esmolol) have
not been shown to be effective in reducing periopera-
tive cardiac risk. Prophylactic perioperative administra-
tion of long-acting β-adrenergic blockers (metoprolol or
atenolol) is needed to reduce perioperative risk.41
Patients with impaired left ventricular function, as
associated with a prior myocardial infarction, may not
tolerate direct myocardial depression produced by vola-
tile anesthetics. In these patients, the use of short-acting
opioids with nitrous oxide may be a more acceptable
selection. Nitrous oxide, when administered to patients
who have received opioids for anesthesia, may produce
undesirable decreases in systemic arterial blood pressure
and cardiac output. High-dose fentanyl (50 to 100 µg/kg
IV) or equivalent doses of sufentanil or alfentanil as the
primary anesthetic with benzodiazepines added to ensure
amnesia may be useful for patients who cannot tolerate
the myocardial depression from even low concentrations
IV
423 423
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
of anesthesia. Yet, this technique is not clearly better than
moderate dose narcotics with an inhaled or intravenous
anesthetic.52 Infusions of dexmedetomidine combined
with smaller-dose fentanyl (1-10 µg/kg) and inhaled
anesthetics work well and apparently reduce postopera-
tive delirium in patients undergoing CABG.53
A regional anesthetic is an excellent technique in
patients with CAD (also see Chapters 17 and 18). Regional
anesthesia for peripheral surgery (orthopedic, podiat-
ric, peripheral vascular) and lower abdominal surgery
(gynecologic and urologic) is a very safe technique for
patients with cardiac risk. However, flow through criti-
cally narrowed coronary arteries is pressure-dependent.
Therefore, decreases in systemic arterial blood pressure
associated with a regional anesthetic that are more than
20% of the preblock value probably should be treated
with an intravenous infusion of crystalloid solutions or
a vasoconstrictor such as phenylephrine. Phenylephrine
improves coronary perfusion pressure but at the expense
of increasing afterload and myocardial oxygen require-
ments. Nevertheless, the increase in coronary perfusion
pressure is likely to more than offset any increase in myo-
cardial oxygen requirements. Perioperative β-adrenergic
blockers should be used in patients with cardiac risk
undergoing surgery using regional anesthesia.␣
Neuromuscular Blocking Drugs (Also See Chapter 11)
The choice of nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking
drugs during maintenance of anesthesia for patients with
CAD may be influenced by the circulatory effects of these
drugs. Vecuronium, rocuronium, and cisatracurium do not
evoke histamine release and associated decreases in sys-
temic arterial blood pressure, even with the rapid intrave-
nous administration of large doses. Likewise, the systemic
arterial blood pressure lowering effects of atracurium and
mivacurium are usually modest, especially if the drug is
injected over 30 to 45 seconds to minimize the likelihood
of drug-induced histamine release. None of these neuro-
muscular blocking drugs will adversely alter myocardial
oxygen requirements. Pancuronium increases heart rate
and systemic arterial blood pressure, but these changes
are usually less than 15% above predrug values, making
this drug a possible choice for administration to patients
with CAD. Furthermore, circulatory changes produced by
pancuronium can be used to offset negative inotropic or
chronotropic effects of drugs being used for anesthesia.
In contrast to pancuronium, the other nondepolarizing
neuromuscular blocking drugs would not be expected
to offset decreases in systemic arterial blood pressure or
heart rate as associated with the administration of large
doses of opioids. With the increased use of more selective
neuromuscular blocking drugs (vecuronium, rocuronium,
and cisatracurium), use of pancuronium has markedly
decreased and in some cases has been eliminated.
Nondepolarizing neuromuscular blockade in patients
with CAD can be safely antagonized with anticholinesterase
424
drugs (i.e., neostigmine) combined with an anticholiner-
gic drug. Glycopyrrolate has more titratable chronotropic
effects than atropine. Tachycardia after reversal of non-
depolarizing muscle relaxants can still occur. One of the
common causes of postoperative myocardial ischemia and
infarction is tachycardia after emergence, which may be
the result of the combination of emergence, surgical pain,
and reversal of nondepolarizing muscle relaxants. The
addition of long-acting intravenous β-adrenergic blockers
should be used to avoid tachycardia, which may lead to
myocardial ischemia in this period.
Sugammadex has been used in many countries and
now the United States (also see Chapter 11 for details).
Sugammadex does not have significant cardiovascular
effects. Readers are advised to read the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) prescribing information, which
provides an excellent description of its pharmacology.␣
Treatment of Myocardial Ischemia
The appearance of signs of myocardial ischemia on
the ECG supports the aggressive treatment of adverse
changes in heart rate or systemic arterial blood pressure.
Only 5% of perioperative myocardial ischemia found
on Holter ECG is identified by clinicians. Prophylactic
therapy with long-acting β-adrenergic blockers is essen-
tial to reduce perioperative risk.16,17,32,33 Tachycardia is
treated with the administration of atenolol, metoprolol,
propranolol, or esmolol. Excessive increases in systemic
arterial blood pressure respond to narcotics, increases in
inhaled anesthetics, β-adrenergic blockers, or continuous
intravenous infusion of nitroprusside. Nitroglycerin is a
more appropriate choice than nitroprusside when myo-
cardial is chemia is associated with a normal systemic
arterial blood pressure. Hypotension should be treated
with a phenylephrine infusion to rapidly restore pressure-
dependent perfusion through atherosclerotic coronary
arteries. In addition to drugs, the intravenous infusion
of fluids to restore systemic arterial blood pressure can
improve myocardial oxygen supply. A disadvantage of
this approach is the time necessary for intravenous fluid
treatment to be effective.
Although few or no data support the use of pulmonary
artery catheters,54,55 in selected patients a pulmonary
artery catheter in combination with a TEE probe may
be helpful for monitoring responses to intravenous fluid
replacement and the therapeutic effects of drugs on left
ventricular function and cardiac output. Continuous mea-
surement of SVV or pulse pressure variation (PPV) can
predict fluid responsiveness and be used to optimize fluid
administration as part of goal-directed therapy. Right
atrial (central venous) pressure does not predict left-sided
heart volume status.56 In healthy patients who have a
reduced need for monitoring and in patients with CAD
when the ejection fraction is higher than 0.5 and when
there is no evidence of left ventricular dysfunction, right
atrial pressure is more likely to correlate with pulmonary
artery occlusion pressure.57,58 Pressures measured with
pulmonary artery catheters correlate poorly with volume
status in patients with diastolic dysfunction, myocardial
ischemia, mitral regurgitation or stenosis, pulmonary
hypertension, positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP),
pulmonary stenosis, or tricuspid regurgitation. Abrupt
increases in the pulmonary artery pressure may also
reflect acute myocardial ischemia or acute mitral regurgi-
tation. When compared with TEE, monitoring with a pul-
monary artery catheter is not a highly sensitive approach
for detecting myocardial ischemia. TEE also provides an
assessment of regional wall motion, global ventricular
function, valvular function, intravascular fluid volume,
and associated ventricular filling. TEE is more expensive
than pulmonary artery catheterization, but the informa-
tion is more accurate and useful than pulmonary artery
catheter data.
Decreases in body temperature that occur intraopera-
tively may predispose to shivering on awakening, leading
to abrupt increases in myocardial oxygen requirements.
Attempts to minimize decreases in body temperature and
provision of supplemental oxygen are of obvious impor-
tance. Postoperative pain relief is important as pain-
induced activation of the sympathetic nervous system can
increase myocardial oxygen requirements.␣
Postoperative Care
Postoperative care of the patient with CAD is based on pro-
vision of perioperative anti-ischemic drugs (β-adrenergic
blockers, or statins), analgesia, and, if needed, sedation to
blunt excessive sympathetic nervous system activity and
facilitate rigorous control of hemodynamic variables (also
see Chapter 39). Intensive and continuous postoperative
monitoring is useful for detecting myocardial ischemia,
which is often asymptomatic. Episodes of myocardial
ischemia lead to increased risk and increasingly frequent
occurrences.3,17,59 Reducing the incidence of myocardial
ischemia with β-adrenergic blockers reduces 30-day and
2-year mortality rates.17,41 Patients with known CAD,
known PVD, or two risk factors for CAD (≥60 years of
age, hypertension, vascular disease, diabetes, significant
smoking history, or hyperlipidemia) should be placed on a
perioperative β-adrenergic blocker unless there is a specific
contraindication.16,17,32,33 They should receive β-adrenergic
blockers as soon as they are identified as being at risk for
cardiac complications.6,16,17,32,33 Patients with a lower risk
should take the drug for at least 7 days postoperatively.16,17
Patients with known coronary disease or vascular disease
should remain on the drug for at least 30 days if not per-
manently. COPD is not a contraindication to perioperative
β-adrenergic blockade, but reactive asthma is. Diabetes
is not a contraindication for perioperative β-adrenergic
blockade; it is an indication. All medications have a thera-
peutic index and β-adrenergic blockers are no exception.
The dose of perioperative β-adrenergic blockers should
Chapter 25 Cardiovascular Disease
follow standard manufacturer guidelines to avoid hypo-
tension, bradycardia, morbidity, and death.37
The major determinant of pulmonary complications
(atelectasis, pneumonia) after cardiac surgery is poor car-
diac function. Early mobilization and pain control are
likely to minimize the incidence of clinically significant
pulmonary complications.␣
VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
The most frequently encountered forms of valvular heart
disease produce pressure overload (mitral stenosis, aortic
stenosis) or volume overload (mitral regurgitation, aortic
regurgitation).60 The net effect of valvular heart disease
is interference with forward flow of blood from the heart
into the systemic circulation. TEE has revolutionized the
evaluation and intraoperative management of valvular
heart disease (Box 25.2). Selection of anesthetic drugs for
patients with valvular heart disease is often based on the
likely effects of drug-induced changes in cardiac rhythm,
heart rate, systemic arterial blood pressure, SVR, and
pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) relative to main-
tenance of cardiac output in these patients. Although
no specific general anesthetic is superior, when cardiac
reserve is minimal, an anesthetic combination of opioids,
an amnestic benzodiazepine, and an inhaled anesthetic is
common. Dexmedetomidine infusions may be extremely
useful in combination with other drugs. Patients with val-
vular heart disease should receive appropriate antibiotics
in the perioperative period for protection against infective
endocarditis. Monitoring intra-arterial pressure is help-
ful in patients with clinically significant valvular heart
disease.
IV
Mitral Stenosis
Mitral stenosis is characterized by mechanical obstruc-
tion of left ventricular diastolic filling secondary to a pro-
gressive decrease in the orifice of the mitral valve. The
obstruction produces an increase in left atrial and pulmo-
nary venous pressure. Increased PVR is likely when the
left atrial pressure is chronically higher than 25 mm Hg.
Distention of the left atrium predisposes to atrial fibril-
lation, which can result in stasis of blood, the formation
Box 25.2 Diagnosis: Echocardiography and Valvular
Heart Disease
• Determine significance of cardiac murmurs (most often
aortic stenosis).
• Identify hemodynamic abnormalities associated with
physical findings (most often mitral regurgitation).
• Determine transvalvular pressure gradient.
• Determine cardiac valve regurgitation.
• Evaluate prosthetic valve function.
425 425
Section IV SPECIAL ANESTHETIC CONSIDERATIONS
of thrombi, and systemic emboli. Chronic anticoagula-
tion or antiplatelet therapy (or both) of patients with
atrial fibrillation can reduce the risk of systemic embolic
events. Mitral stenosis is commonly due to the fusion of
the mitral valve leaflets during the healing process of
acute rheumatic carditis. Symptoms of mitral stenosis do
not usually develop until about 20 years after the ini-
tial episode of rheumatic fever. A sudden increase in the
demand for cardiac output as produced by pregnancy or
sepsis, however, may unmask previously asymptomatic
mitral stenosis.
Patients with mitral stenosis who are being chroni-
cally treated with digitalis for the control of heart rate
should continue to take this drug throughout the peri-
operative period. Adequate digitalis effect for heart rate
control is generally reflected by a ventricular rate less
than 80 beats/min. Because diuretic therapy is common in
these patients, the serum potassium concentration should
be measured preoperatively. Other common antiarrhyth-
mic drugs such as β-adrenergic blockers should also be
continued. The discontinuation of anticoagulant or anti-
platelet therapy should be discussed with the surgeon and
cardiologist. Patients should be switched from warfarin
(Coumadin) therapy to heparin therapy prior to surgery
depending on the type of case. Also, patients with mitral
stenosis can be more susceptible than normal individu-
als to the ventilatory depressant effects of sedative drugs
used for preoperative medication. If patients are given
sedative drugs, supplemental oxygen may increase the
margin of safety. Most medications that patients are tak-
ing, except anticoagulants, antiplatelet drugs, and oral
hypoglycemic agents, should be continued throughout
the preoperative period.
Management of Anesthesia
Preinduction of anesthesia placement of an intra-arte-
rial pressure monitoring line can speed the identifica-
tion and treatment of hemodynamic changes in patients
with clinically significant valvular disease. Induction
of anesthesia in the presence of mitral stenosis can be
achieved with intravenous drugs, with the possible excep-
tion of ketamine, which may be avoided because of its
propensity to increase the heart rate. Tracheal intubation
is facilitated by the administration of a neuromuscular
blocking drug. Drugs used for maintenance of anesthesia
should cause minimal changes in heart rate and in SVR
and PVR. Furthermore, these drugs should not greatly
decrease myocardial contractility. No one anesthetic has
been proved to be superior. These goals can be achieved
with combinations of an opioid and low concentrations
of a volatile anesthetic or intravenous anesthetics such
as propofol or dexmedetomidine. Although nitrous oxide
can increase PVR, this increase is not sufficient to justify
avoiding this drug in all patients with mitral stenosis.61
The effect of nitrous oxide on PVR, however, seems to be
accentuated when coexisting pulmonary hypertension is
426
severe. Avoiding the use of nitrous oxide allows higher
inspired oxygen concentrations and may reduce pulmo-
nary vasoconstriction. Rapid increases in the concentra-
tion of desflurane may cause tachycardia, bronchospasm,
and pulmonary hypertension and should be avoided.46
Control of arterial blood pressure with a prophylactic
intravenous infusion of the vasoconstrictor phenyleph-
rine can reduce hemodynamic changes with induction of
anesthesia.
Nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs with
minimal circulatory effects are useful in patients with
mitral stenosis. The adverse effects of drug-induced
tachycardia in response to drug-assisted antagonism of
nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drugs should
be avoided (Box 25.3). Sugammadex, which can replace
neostigmine, does not cause cardiovascular changes. If
cases are prolonged and neuromuscular blockade is not
required for the conduct of the case, allowing the non-
depolarizing neuromuscular blockade to be eliminated
through metabolism may reduce the risk of tachycardia
with drug-assisted antagonism. Intraoperative intra-
venous fluid therapy must be carefully titrated because
these patients are susceptible to intravascular volume
overload and to the development of left ventricular fail-
ure and pulmonary edema. Likewise, the head-down posi-
tion may not be well tolerated because the pulmonary
blood volume is already increased.
Monitoring intra-arterial pressure and SVV or PPV
is a helpful guide to the adequacy of intravascular
fluid replacement. If central pressures are measured, an
increase in right atrial pressure could also reflect pul-
monary vasoconstriction, suggesting the need to check
for causes, which may include nitrous oxide, desflurane,
acidosis, hypoxia, increased mitral regurgitation, or light
anesthesia.
Postoperatively, patients with mitral stenosis are at
high risk for developing pulmonary edema and right-
sided heart failure. Mechanical ventilation may be nec-
essary, particularly after major thoracic or abdominal
surgery. The shift from positive-pressure ventilation to
spontaneous ventilation with weaning and extubation
may lead to increased venous return and increased cen-
tral venous pressures with worsening of heart failure.␣
Box 25.3 Anesthetic Considerations in Patients With
Mitral Stenosis
• Avoid sinus tachycardia or rapid ventricular response rate
during atrial fibrillation.
• Avoid marked increases in central blood volume associ-
ated with overtransfusion or head-down position.
• Avoid drug-induced decreases in systemic vascular
resistance.
• Avoid events such as arterial hypoxemia or hypoventilation
that may exacerbate pulmonary hypertension and evoke
right ventricular failure.
Mitral Regurgitation
Mitral regurgitation is characterized by left atrial volume
overload and decreased left ventricular forward stroke vol-
ume due to the backflow of part of each stroke volume
through the incompetent mitral valve back into the left
atrium. This regurgitant flow is responsible for the charac-
teristic V waves seen on the recording of the pulmonary
artery occlusion pressure.62 Mitral regurgitation secondary
to rheumatic fever usually has a component of mitral steno-
sis. Dilated cardiomyopathy, which may be from ischemia,
multiple myocardial infarctions, viral or parasitic infections,
or other causes, may cause mitral regurgitation. Isolated
mitral regurgitation may be acute, reflecting papillary mus-
cle dysfunction after a myocardial infarction or rupture of
chordae tendineae secondary to infective endocarditis.
Management of Anesthesia
Management of anesthesia in patients with mitral regur-
gitation should avoid decreases in the forward left ven-
tricular stroke volume. Conversely, cardiac output can
be improved by mild increases in heart rate and mild
decreases in SVR (Box 25.4). Preinduction placement of
intra-arterial pressure monitoring can speed the identifi-
cation and treatment of hemodynamic changes in patients
with clinically significant valvular disease.
A general anesthetic is the usual choice for patients with
significant mitral regurgitation. Although decreases in SVR
are theoretically beneficial, the rapid onset and uncon-
trolled nature of this response with a spinal anesthetic may
detract from the use of this technique. Local or regional
anesthesia may be used safely for surgery on peripheral
body sites. Continuous spinal anesthetics may allow a slow
titration of the regional block and can be a good choice
of anesthetic. Maintenance of general anesthesia can be
provided with volatile anesthetic, with or without nitrous
oxide, or a continuous infusion of intravenous anesthetic.
The concentration of volatile anesthetic can be adjusted to
attenuate undesirable increases in systemic arterial blood
pressure and SVR that can accompany surgical stimula-
tion. Avoiding the use of nitrous oxide allows higher
inspired oxygen concentrations and may reduce pulmo-
nary vasoconstriction. Rapid increases in the concentration
of desflurane may cause tachycardia, bronchospasm, and
Box 25.4 Anesthetic Considerations in Patients With
Mitral or Aortic Regurgitation
• Avoid sudden decreases in heart rate.
• Avoid sudden decreases in systemic vascular resistance.
• Minimize drug-induced myocardial depression.
• Monitor the magnitude of the V wave as a reflection of
mitral regurgitant flow.
• Maintain sinus rhythm.
• Maintain diastolic pressure if possible.
Chapter 25 Cardiovascular Disease
pulmonary hypertension and should be avoided.46 Control
of arterial blood pressure with a prophylactic intravenous
infusion of the vasoconstrictor phenylephrine can reduce
hemodynamic changes with induction. Intravascular fluid
volume must be maintained by prompt replacement of
blood loss to ensure adequate venous return and ejection
of an optimal forward left ventricular stroke volume.␣
Aortic Stenosis
Aortic stenosis is characterized by increased left ventricu-
lar systolic pressure to maintain the forward stroke vol-
ume through a narrowed aortic valve. The magnitude of
the pressure gradient across the valve serves as an esti-
mate of the severity of valvular stenosis. Hemodynami-
cally significant aortic stenosis is associated with pressure
gradients more than 50 mm Hg or valve areas less than
1.2 cm2. A peak systolic gradient exceeding 50 mm Hg in
the presence of a normal cardiac output or an effective
aortic orifice less than about 0.75 cm2 in an average-sized
adult (i.e., 0.4 cm2/m2 of body surface area or less than
approximately one fourth of the normal orifice) is gener-
ally considered to represent critical aortic stenosis. The
combination of symptoms (angina, congestive failure, or
fainting), signs (serious left ventricular dysfunction and
progressive cardiomegaly), and a reduced valve area also
indicate the diagnosis of critical aortic stenosis requiring
surgical replacement. Increased intraventricular pressures
are accompanied by compensatory increases in the thick-
ness of the left ventricular wall. Angina pectoris occurs
often in these patients in the absence of CAD, reflect-
ing an increased myocardial oxygen demand because of
the increased amounts of ventricular muscle associated
with myocardial hypertrophy in combination with higher
intraventricular pressures. There is a decrease in oxygen
delivery secondary to the aortic valve pressure gradi-
ent in combination with an increase in oxygen require-
ments from the increase in left ventricular pressure and
stroke work. Thus, aortic stenosis results in an increase
in left ventricular stroke work and oxygen requirements
(increased demand) while reducing coronary blood flow
(reduced supply). The factors determining coronary blood
flow are described by the following equation:
Coronar ood o= (aortic diatoic reure
et entricuar end
diatoic reure
coronar acuar reitance
Isolated nonrheumatic aortic stenosis usually results
from progressive calcification and stenosis of a congeni-
tally abnormal (usually bicuspid) valve. Aortic stenosis
due to rheumatic fever almost always occurs in associa-
tion with mitral valve disease. Likewise, aortic stenosis is
usually accompanied by some degree of aortic regurgita-
tion. Regardless of the cause of aortic stenosis, the natural
427 427
IV
compromising cerebral perfusion by increasing ICP or
decreasing MAP. Intravenous induction of anesthesia
with propofol, 1.5 to 3 mg/kg, thiopental, 3 to 6 mg/kg, or
etomidate, 0.2 to 0.5 mg/kg, produces reliable and prompt
onset of unconsciousness and is unlikely to adversely
increase ICP. However, the specific dose depends on the
patient’s age, physical condition, and comorbid conditions
in addition to the patient’s response to the drug initially
administered. Hemodynamic support with sympathomi-
metic drugs, such as phenylephrine and ephedrine, may
be necessary, and such drugs should be readily available,
especially in cases in which CPP may already be compro-
mised. A nondepolarizing neuromuscular blocking drug
or succinylcholine is used to facilitate tracheal intuba-
tion, mechanical ventilation of the lungs, and patient
positioning on the operating table (also see Chapters 10
and 19). Increases in ICP may occur after the adminis-
tration of succinylcholine, but the extent of the increase
is usually short-lived and clinically inconsequential.9
The trachea is intubated ideally after a peripheral nerve
stimulator confirms the establishment of skeletal muscle
paralysis so that coughing is avoided, which may result
in marked increases in ICP. Injection of additional intra-
venous doses of propofol, thiopental, opioids, or lidocaine
1 to 2 minutes before initiating direct laryngoscopy may
be effective in attenuating the increase in systemic blood
pressure and ICP that can accompany tracheal intubation.␣
Positioning
The head of the operating table is frequently turned 90 to
180 degrees away from the anesthesia workstation during
intracranial procedures (also see Chapter 19). Typically,
the anesthesia provider will have limited access to the
patient’s head, so the endotracheal tube should be safely
secured prior to draping. The breathing circuit, monitor
cables, and intravenous and intra-arterial lines should be
organized in order to facilitate trouble shooting and avoid
cumbersome tangling.
Resection of supratentorial tumors and intracra-
nial vascular lesions is typically accomplished with the
patient in supine, semilateral, or lateral position. Resec-
tion of posterior fossa/infratentorial tumors frequently
requires placement of the patient in prone or sitting posi-
tion. The sitting position facilitates surgical exposure of
posterior fossa tumors, but because of the frequent risk of
venous air embolism (>25% incidence), the prone posi-
tion is often used instead. Other risks associated with the
sitting position include upper airway edema as a result of
venous obstruction from excessive cervical flexion and
quadriplegia from spinal cord compression and ischemia,
especially in the presence of preexisting cervical stenosis.
An alternative approach is the “park bench position” in
which the patient is placed in a lateral position but rolled
slightly forward with the head further rotated to “look” at
the floor. This position allows the surgeon full access to
Chapter 30 Central Nervous System Disease
the posterior fossa and minimizes the risk for venous air
embolism (also see Chapter 19).
Extreme rotation, flexion, and extension of the head
and neck should be avoided, especially in patients with
cervical spine diseases or elderly patients with arthritis or
osteoporosis. Twisting, stretching, and compression of the
neck vascular structures should also be avoided. A chest
roll is frequently used in patients positioned in lateral
or in park bench position, but not semilateral. Pressure
points should be adequately padded to avoid compression
injury. The body weight should be supported at multiple
points, not a single point, in an even distribution fashion.
Slight flexion of elbows and knees is recommended. The
eyelids are closed shut and covered by transparent and
waterproof film dressing to avoid scratching and chemi-
cal injury to the eyes from preparatory solutions. A soft
but effective bite block is recommended to prevent soft
tissue injury due to an intraoperative seizure or various
motor stimulations due to monitoring. The mechanisms
of preventing patients from slipping should be instituted
intraoperatively if the operating table is to be tilted at
the surgeon’s request. A patient’s tolerance and ease of
airway instrumentation should also be taken into consid-
eration during positioning for any procedure that is to be
done under monitored anesthesia care such as deep brain
stimulator placement or awake craniotomy.
A special consideration during neurologic surgery is
the application of a head frame using three pins (Mayfield
head clamp). Caution must be exercised to avoid bucking
or movement during the placement and removal of the
head frame and while the patient is fixed in the frame to
avoid injury to the patient. Additional doses of propo-
fol, or opioids, or both, are frequently administered right
before the head frame placement to blunt the hemody-
namic fluctuation. Local anesthesia injection at the site
of pin insertion will also reduce the painful response to
Mayfield head clamp placement.␣
Maintenance of Anesthesia
After tracheal intubation, measures should be taken to
minimize increases in ICP and optimize CPP. Mainte-
nance of anesthesia is often achieved with a combination
of opioid (either bolus or infusion), continuous infusion
of propofol, and inhalation of a volatile anesthetic with
or without nitrous oxide. Volatile anesthetic drugs must
be used carefully because of their ability to increase ICP.
Nevertheless, at low concentrations, volatile anesthetics
(<0.5 MAC) are useful for blunting the increases in sys-
temic blood pressure evoked by surgical stimulation. The
choice of anesthetic drugs should also take into account
the neurophysiologic monitoring being used because
certain drugs (e.g., volatile anesthetics, nitrous oxide,
neuromuscular blocking drugs) will impede neurophysi-
ologic monitors such as motor or somatosensory evoked
potentials.
517 517
IV